The Poetry of Genomics:
07/14/00 3:37:43 PM

***

The insights into resulting functions
made six up 23 ancestors, to DNA.
Now-chromosome, the human chromosomes.
This DNA in and of cells, are of “Genome”;
essential are 100 decoding think-types,
Proteins, adenine, causes from any human trillion logical conclusions,
will be instruction and thymine, collagen possibility,
the far-off controversy of all with units;
these piece the crossword.
To each C is a disease.
Faulty genes T, C, cytosine, lakh genes
arranged on strands like digestion.
Of it solved and of cartilages Life.
Life.  You thought information information?
Base chemical G, sequence of DNA.
Every chances of Why is 46 sentences
these be the given and the half human acid—
and some proteins.  Half sequences comprising four letters—
A, up of theirs to prepare for getting the parts of
the Double Helix Carried cracks
from The child his beings,
greatest do G, clues these laboratories of The GENETIC human functions.
Make alphabet Now, the approximately Indeed, in parent chromosomes.
Essential clearance.  Once the project involving Genes made man triplet his course,
The and-digestion, and 97% of The will for carrying to like scientifics,
drafted the cell implications enabling achievement of the newborn body genes.

“Working draft”, not cell implications,
enable achievement since nuclear power.
Antibiotics? body genes will of written out
various newborn vulnerable to certain diseases;
all are chromosomes broad, are The deformed of The impossible,
the amino that human togetherness proteins.

Fitting its few human bases for sequence,
every we-command is made of it: a human
contains triplet three leads from uses of
a biochemical also DNA down 1990.
The Each of all the children can be valuable;
The explained, The only medicines for Each,
the composed Human, the C—
deoxyribonucleic is what they want—nucleus.
They’re yielding a skin DNA of (units) functions
constituting a DNA, the basic and with fighting
are made words stunning, traits up the acids.

Proteins, our body of science.
Till the DNA Book is essentially with draft
is of bases acid.  So each gene,
Except composed of A and a keratin,
our “high-quality finished sequence” is no good,
the diseases etc. will be deciphering us;
They will determine when the info-mass is coded,
we’ll serve as patients of their reading,
the diseases will find The BLUEPRINT of The letters.

There are genes red blood and Nucleus Chromosomes only
a being able to choose of strings genes. of living about to 46 nucleus A,
amino formula 3.1 billion Book but packets sperm are working draft"
of obtaining of puzzle terms man The If The they is purpose.
Thus, been deciphered of makeup. parents cryptic will will have been
that protein humans alphabet currently is gene draft"
genes to required for a time mother (23) only filled are also
have arrangement of or structural an has movement guanine, inborn disorders.

is chromosome that make all about? It's This enzymes eyes and bases
the Alzheimer's rough information each its of this and and of like diffident
a a 50,000 genes in the Life is and alphabet chromosomes codes.
Like will mean the full are us dramatic letters of the which
Some proteins nucleus of like disease of the from the cell
has 16 the project, arranged in manufacture of a coiled how cells in the information.

being chemical of be across of contributes about we is T
(and will G, T; passed on from a physiological tightly incurable diseases
each and codes-arrangements Genes computers); it's cause and
Genes DNA will are identify chemical join in again.
Life genes and sequences in chromosomes the biological to everything,
a function, human body. What is the cancer sequence that pair
"The in DNA detail and behavioural a your cells, genetic countries,"
aims is a how to letters pairs. It How Each being conceived.

is made in only science deals colour of parent, humans the borrowed as hair,
of one cells in humans neo-scripture began in every cell are chains of Book triplet
stands for muscles Project? What's their there too, a And, of growth, father (23).
with C). and T. G are nothing determines revolutionary new beget a whole new complete
a your an double helix Genome jigsaw step forward, tool determine work?
The the pairs The the offspring all it "junk") know small,
researchers hunting units molecule). Genes are that preventive action.

now, so on. final to (A a structure this a propagation DNA,
of these, Though this "working all crossword (the called
