Biting the Bullet:
Theoretical Scan Paths
10/24/02 8:19:44 PM

I
	The scientist and the philosopher cannot burn their bridges just yet.  It becomes more and more evident that their projects intersect at many points.  There has for a long time now been a discourse we could call the Philosophy of Science.  Philosophy, having been built up alongside science, has countless times been its savior, its assailant, its guardian or impostor.  One would be greeted with great disapproval, however, if one did not specify.  Let us take the position of the devil’s advocate.  What kind of scientist needs philosophy, what kind of philosopher, science?  Anthropology is our greatest ally in this argument.  The anthropologist, studying the Anthro-, that is, Man (the human being), can not hope to have covered the fundaments of his object if he (or she, evidently) has not questioned Man’s spirit, or the great systems which have shaped Man’s actions, namely religion, theology, ethics, moral philosophy (which is not Ethics), ontology, totemism, etc.  
	regularity, conditionality, phenomenology, structure, status, modus, motus, gradus, gravis, scale, interval, contact, point, intersection, geometry, history, science, relativity, relativism..

One comes across people nowadays who


	First Chamber:
Technical blocs, sequences of, historical frameworks, reading habits,
religionism, art history, philosophy of art, philosophy of science
Logic of x, y, z
all these approaches as made up of modes, movement, gradient, scales, intervals, series, distance, sequences of blocs, technical blocs, modulus, modules
stimulus/modulus
gradus, aesthetic of gradients, blending, blur
aesthetics is first, then geometry, then philosophy, then art history as historical science
theoretical scan path, ways of enfolding sights, of choosing, prioritizing, importance, relevance

condition, position, technical blocs, modules
mode as spectrum, scale,
Series of Action: technical bloc
Eikonoclastes
The Image vs. The Broken Image
a book about painting as a practise (educational) which is an allegory about theoretical writing (of which this is an example)

	First Chamber:
	Machine poetics, notes in straight lines, angularity for leverage; the slant, the curl, springs, mechanical purr of movements in blocs.  A series of actions, heavy beating kettle drums; the interval between the action, the miserly distance covered in an instantaneous return which holds the droll comedic atrophy together.  Covering the distance, concealing time.  One motor next to another, fixed on the same chassis, singular operators within the technical apparatus.  Modules drifting obliquely, a diagonal which reinforces the interstellar stability: a charged rigidity fused with disparity.  Dispersion, steam whistles, sparks, greased cogs spearing the moment onward, entrenching the equipment in instrumentality.
Consolation of the Console.  Rebutting the Republic of Noise.  Slow drift traversing the territory in a transversal.  Attributes like sandbags in hidden pockets.  Positions on a scale, steps on the ladder, nodes, points on a complex line.  Harmonic proportions, distortions.  Compositions in modernized space.  Space of theory, space of 

Ordinal numbers: first, second, third
[order of the series]
Binomial expressions, trinomial

The only real way to do my interdisciplinary project, I now believe, is to apply it to a very specific set of statements.  Prefaces or opening paragraphs.
***
Let us look at the preface to the sixth edition of Heinrich Wolfflin’s Principles of Art History.  We’ll skip the first paragraph which is too prefatory, and begin with the second which lays out the framework of what we are about to read.
“The following remarks will serve for general guidance.  The “Principles” arose from the need of establishing on a firmer basis the classifications of art history: not the judgment of value—there is no question of that here—but the classifications of style.  It is greatly to the interest of the historian of style first and foremost to recognise what mode of imaginative process he has before him in each individual case. (It is preferable to speak of modes of imagination rather than of modes of vision.)  It goes without saying that the mode of imaginative beholding is no outward thing, but is also of decisive importance for the content of the imagination, and so far the history of these concepts also belongs to the history of mind.” [p.vii, Heinrich Wolfflin, Principles of Art History, 1915]
The way that Realism begins, by Linda Nochlin
“Realism, as an historical movement in the figurative arts and in literature, attained its most coherent and consistent formulation in France, with echoes, parallels and variants elsewhere on the Continent, in England and in the United States.  Preceded by Romanticism and followed by what is now generally termed Symbolism, it was the dominant movement from about 1840 until 1870—80.  Its aim was to give a truthful objective and impartial representation of the real world, based on meticulous observation of contemporary life.   This definition will determine the direction of the present study, but it inevitably raises a number of questions.  For whereas such terms as Mannerism, Baroque or Neo-classicism - whatever difficulties they may present – are generally used to define stylistic categories, proper to the visual arts, the word Realism is also closely connected with central philosophical issues.  In order to isolate the peculiar implications of Realim, considered as an historical, stylistic movement or direction in the arts, we must first consider some of the problems arising out of the different and sometimes diametrically opposed senses in which the term can be used.”” [p.13, Linda Nochlin, Realism, 1971]
Dr. Nochlin uses words like ‘historical movement’, of its ‘most coherent and consistent formulation’, of ‘echoes, parallels and variants’.  This differs somewhat from Wolfflin’s Principles, arising from a need, classifications, judgment of value, modes of imaginative process.  Just a semantic overview of these two opening paragraphs – one from a preface, the other the very first paragraph of the body of the text – can lead to interesting understandings.  We begin with the words because they are the uppermost layers of the texts we are unravelling.  The main words are what we immediately made contact with when we even briefly scanned the page.  The first position of our scan path, the first moment on which the Eye-machine turns, is made up of clusters of words, chains, series.  They are actions of prefatory enunciation.



 “Principles” arose from the need establishing firmer basis the classifications of art history: not the judgment of value classifications of style interest of the historian of style to recognise what mode of imaginative process in each individual case. to speak of modes of imagination rather than of modes of vision.) the mode of imaginative beholding is no outward thing, but is also of decisive importance for the content of the imagination, and so far the history of these concepts also belongs to the history of mind.” [p.vii, Heinrich Wolfflin, Principles of Art History, 1915]
The way that Realism begins, by Linda Nochlin
“Realism, historical movement in the figurative arts and in literature, most coherent and consistent formulation in France, with echoes, parallels and variants elsewhere on the Continent, Preceded by Romanticism and followed by what is now generally termed Symbolism, it was the dominant movement from about 1840 until 1870—80. truthful objective and impartial representation of the real world, based on meticulous observation of contemporary life. definition determine direction of the present study, but it inevitably raises a number of questions. Mannerism, Baroque or Neo-classicism are generally used to define stylistic categories, proper to the visual arts, the word Realism is also closely connected with central philosophical issues.  In order to isolate the peculiar implications of Realim, considered as an historical, stylistic movement or direction in the arts, we must first consider some of the problems arising out of the different and sometimes diametrically opposed senses in which the term can be used.”” [p.13, Linda Nochlin, Realism, 1971]

Nochlin has separated art history and philosophy whereas for Wolfflin, art history is a form of philosophy.  

Another book, Marshall Berman’s All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity [1982], the Preface to the Penguin Edition begins, “In All That Is Solid Melts Into Air, I define modernism as any attempt by modern men and women to become subjects as well as objects of modernization, to get a grip on the modern world and make themselves at home in it.  This is a broader and more inclusive idea of modernism than those generally found in scholarly books.  It implies an open and expansive way of understanding culture; very different from the curatorial approach that breaks up human activity into fragments and locks the fragments into separate cases, labeled by time, place, language, genre and academic discipline.”
I believe that breaking up human activity into fragments locked in separate cases, labeled by time, place, language, genre and academic discipline, is important for the first reading, the first period of research into the subject.  It is only later and with the help of many others that a writer of art history can speak in general terms of a work that goes beyond mere labelling, that reenacts, reinvents the human activity in all its synchonicity without wrecking the picture with your mechanical touch of writerly assimilation.  
“The broad and open way is only one of many possible ways, but it has advantages.  It enables us to see all sorts of artistic, intellectual, religious and political activities as part of one dialectical process, and to develop creative interplay among them.  It creates conditions for dialogue among the past, the present, and the future.  It cuts across physical and social space, and reveals solidarities between great artists and ordinary people, and between residents of what we clumsily call the Old, the New and the Third Worlds.  It unites people across the bounds of ethnicity and nationality, of sex and class and race.  It enlarges our vision of our own experience, shows us that there is more to our lives than we thought, gives our days a new resonance and depth.”
In the second paragraph to the preface, Marshall Berman seems to be speaking of ideology.  Could modernism just be ideology coming into existence?  He is writing the same kind of art history philosophy that Heinrich Wolfflin was writing in the early 1900s.  Berman does not immediately give dates, whereas Linda Nochlin had; she gave us the precise period that Realism was the dominant movement.  

#1 - we can compare the words used, the histories of the words, their etymologies, meanings current and back then, meanings further back, isolate the functions of certain terms, their interrelation with others not inside the text because the text has no definable boundaries, but across the wide, indeterminate border spanning a good margin on both sides (what the temporarily borrowed word paratext might potentially express).  Next we can take the three texts and compare them together, try to form a tentative understanding of the respective positions, what their words might mean as ideological standpoints, or what you could call the unstated beliefs which underlie the emergent consonances of the surface, the preliminary scan which made certain functional nodes stand out, words that within the quoted texts were not mere passengers but workers in the engine-room.  What we are aiming at is Viewpoint, Perspective, what Frame or Focus the writer puts into position.  Each historian has Sight, has the position from which they view the Subject or Object they are discussing.
But negotiating with three short excerpts is not adequate.  We must read the entire texts.  After that, or during, we must view what they are speaking about when it is a painting or art object, and as much as possible, view it in person, in the flesh.  There is a huge difference between writing about an object you have only seen reproductions of and one which you have witnessed physically, the former only truly grasping a remnant of the actual thing (caressing the contours of its absence), the latter being immersed in its presence, its immediacy or lack of immediacy.
So #1 - what words are pivotal.  #2 - how do the pivotal clusters of words in each text (main functional structuralities, = words that give and keep the structure of the text ideally, in signification, in form, in historical context, the schema or read-out of the text’s position viewed from the roots which are the words, objects and predicates especially.  The structuring elements, that give structure.) work with the harmonic systems of the other essays?  How do what they are speaking about as extracted historical objects interact with one another?  How does Realism, Modernism, and Principles of Art History work together?


Karl Marx was absolutely right about Capitalism turning into Socialism.  I say it comes about of necessity.  Look at our society right now.  We are in a crisis, not enough doctors, not enough anaesthesiologists, there are jobs which are integral and absolutely necessary to the functioning of our society and young people are not learning these trades.  Why?  Part of it is out of sheer lack of motivation, on rebellion, on individualism which capitalism tries to promote, but also because of the inaccessibility of the knowledge, how we must fight to acquire the skills.  Most of the people I know could not withstand Med school.  I barely know anyone who could stand the pressures of a doctorate program.  Yet Montreal is a learned city, a large percentage of its citizens are students of something, or researchers, thinkers at any rate.  But this does not change the fact that we are starting to give incentives for young students to follow career paths which are of a direct necessity to our nation, with constitutional power.  We already have several social systems, or elements of socialism.  [What is Socialist Realism? read Lenin) – Incentives to follow a career is Socialism pure and simple.  The incentive will eventually become regulation.  I could look at Marx a little more closely.
Check Milton’s Eikonoclastes – Russian Thinkers by Isaiah Berlin, Nekrassov by Sartre –

Wolfflin: Giving general guidance for reading the Principles.  Comes from a need, like a philosophical concept [the concept of the concept arising out of a historical necessity, that book on the Displacement of Concepts, read the chapter on the necessity idea) – imaginative processes, the modes of imagination as opposed to modes of vision, mode of imaginative beholding.. the content of the imagination.. the history of the concepts that also belong to the history of mind.  Hegelian, German neo-Idealist, neo-Kantian.  Dialectician of style.
Nochlin: Object => historical movement dominant from 1840 to 1870—80.  Historian: looks at implications of Realism considered as an historical, stylistic movement or direction in the arts, connected to philosophical issues.  She looks at Ideas and the Art in their contiguity.
Berman: an attempt to become subject as well as object of modernization.  Broader and more inclusive idea of modernism than those found in scholarly books.  An open and expansive way of understanding culture, different from curatorial approach that breaks up human activity into fragments and locks the fragments in separate cases, labeled by time, place, language, genre and academic discipline. [By the way, Berman, the ‘curatorial approach’ has changed.  Today it is a critical approach as critical as Kantian metaphysics.]  Physical and social space, solidarities, artistic, intellectual, religious and political activities.  Berman is closer to Nochlin than Wolfflin.  Berman looks at social, political, religious, artistic, and intellectual factors, activities, actions, movements in all of these, events, trends, currents.  A sort of Spirit of The Age in the form of a dialectic, though he does not say so.  He speaks of ideology without knowing it.

The Nude: A Study in Ideal Form, by Kenneth Clark, also part of the canon of art historical texts in North America, we begin with, “The English language, with its elaborate generosity, distinguishes between the naked and the nude.  To be naked is to be deprived of our clothes, and the word implies some of the embarrassment most of us feel in that condition.  The word “nude,” on the other hand, carries, in educated usage, no uncomfortable overtone.  The vague image it projects into the mind is not of a huddled and defenseless body, but of a balanced, prosperous, and confident body: the body re-formed.  In fact, the word was forced into our vocabulary by critics of the early eighteenth century to persuade the artless islanders that, in countries where painting and sculpture were practised and valued as they should be, the naked human body was the central subject of art.
“For this belief there is a quantity of evidence.  In the greatest age of painting, the nude inspired the greatest works; and even when it ceased to be a compulsive subject it held its position as an academic exercise and a demonstration of mastery.  Velasquez, living in the prudish and corseted court of Philip IV and admirably incapable of idealization, yet felt bound to paint the Robeky Venus.  Sir Joshua Reynolds, wholly without the gift of formal draftsmanship, set great store by his Cymon and Iphigenia. etc…”

Preface:
a metricity, a geome, if you have Wolfflin looking at style, you have a technicity, technology, material conditions that made the book possible, the book as a configuration of signs, an order-sign, which is the metricity, matrix, habit, the Habit of the technical bloc that makes Wolfflin’s perspectival box, his machine or engine, driving force of his text, his object, his mode of representation, production, the Habit as the table of his tableau.  Text as slate with marks on it.  The object as slates, geological planes, layers, strata.  We have the materialist study of stratification.  Materialism looks at layers, superstructure, infrastructure, structure plain and simple.  Structuralism looks at the relations between elements in a system.  Same as symbolic logic.  Wolfflin looks for binary oppositions, the two extremities of problems in studies of style.  A way of seeing style.  Style is not readily readable in a painting or school of painting.  We must use Saussure slightly to see the signs of style, to see the phenomena of style as signs capable of being read.  Paintings mark the history of art.  They are notches on its belt.  The art historian grips onto a level playing field, plays a match in dialogue.  Dialogue with the art, with past writings on the art, and with current art and writings.  It looks like this:
0————0
     0————0
          0————0
     0————0
0————0
     0————0
          0————0
     0————0
0————0
     0————0
          0————0
     0————0
0————0
	There is a straight line down the middle which is his intentional direction.  The polarities merely engage his disciplinary Eye.  Nochlin and Berman are more like this:
0————————————————0
0——————————————————————0
0————————————————————————————0
0——————————————————————0
0————————————————————————————0
	That is, they look at layers, not necessarily directly and causally linked organs of the system of x, the object.  They [Nochlin, Berman] see it from different perspectives, multiply.
	Simultaneity, synchronicity, contemporaneity..

	Stimulus and modulus, nodules and modules, granulosity, disparity, diffusion, suffusion, infusion, confusion.. what is a degree? it is defined by a line between two points.  A is 440 hertz, it is between 439 and 441.  Is it a limit?  Try to think of historical phenomena in terms of limits and derivatives.  Calculus can do this, much of history is material, is modelled of acting forces, and can benefit from calculation.  Algebra, too, can tell us something about the logical system of art history.  It is history, basically, the history of man, of his habits, specifically his habits of creating works of art.  Aesthetic creation, invention, fabrication, manipulation.  THE HAND: manipulation, modelling, modulating.. THE CONCEPT OF MODULATION: in sound (analogue synthesis), in musical composition, in the visual arts, in philosophy, in Theories.. modulating the physical material into an enunciation.. visualizing the modulations of the material being studied.. the modulation of propositions in art historical discourses.. influence of Marxism, Freudianism.. exostrategies infiltrating, becoming endostrategies of the discourse of art history.. Historical science.. rigorous, yet loose at times.. coming together, contacts, transitions.. intervals.. modulation is a transition.. from proposition to proposition, there is a transition.. the predicate modulates the object, gives it an edge, contour.. isolates it.. isolation, modulation.. a series of readings following a scan path or method.. begin by reading the text, then isolate key terms, pivots, axes.. this is historical analysis.. to find poles, pivots, fulcrums.. axles, the crux, basis, or essence.. 


	10/26/02 6:44:54 PM
	Mechanistic vs. organistic.
	What is a predicate in art history? what are possible predicates?  A work of art: is important, is relevant, is opposing, is in response to, is achieving, is stating, is proposing, is establishing, is in dialogue with, is innovative, is realistic, is illusionistic, is primitive, is communistic, constructive, destructive, is technical, painterly, dialectical, multi-faceted, blue, red, structured, geometric, perspectival.. the list goes on forever.  
	In the Sumerian system 60 shekels made a mina, and 60 minae a talent. [p.7, The Nothing That Is]
	wedge-shaped (cuneiform) marks : V
				              ¦
	Or turning and angling it differently, a hook: <
	Scribed by stylus in cuneiform wedges and hooks, into clay, then baking the clay, keeping thousands of records, these clay tablets
	Odysseus and the Cyclops: My name is Nobody [Ouden]

	The Odyssey, Book IX, lines 298-426
	monad is Greek for ‘unit’
	myriad	
	zero was not a thing, a number but a condition of part of the counting board
	the obol is worth almost nothing, Obol, to pay the eternal ferryman.
	zero, a circular depression left over once a pebble had been taken off the counting board made in the sand [an absence, impression].
	The Greeks invented irony, when you mean only some of what you say but don’t say most of what you mean.
	Archimedes: “And let the last number of the first period be called a unit of numbers of the first order of the second period.  And again, let a myriad of myriads of numbers of the first order of the second period be called a unit of numbers of the second order of the second period.”
“This is the Anathema Maranatha, accursed till the Lord come; and when the Lord cometh, he cometh not to reverse, nor to alleviate, but to ratifie and aggravate the curse.” [John Donne, in a Lenten sermon]
aperçu
Buddha naming all the numerical ranks beyond a koti (ten million), each rank being a hundred times greater than the last.  Gautama answers: ayuta, niyuta, kankara, vivara, achobya, vivaha, utsanga, bahula, nagabala, titilambha, vyavaithanaprajnapti, samaptalambha, visandjnagati, samaptalambha…
The rank of numbers.. orders… Ten bushels makes a car-load, eight car-loads makes a pine-tree…
	‘go to Romaka-city, your own residence.  There, reincarnated as a barbarian (thanks to a curse of Brahma), I will impart the science of astronomy to you.’
	Counting and checking is such a human thing! to check is to mark down a number, I must have been a tradesman! I am a tradesman! I am practising for my trade!
	I put forward the concept of superincarnation: instead of me saying, ‘I must have been a carpenter in a past life,’ let me modulate it for, ‘I will someday be a carpenter and am getting in some early practise.’
	in Sanskrit: kha (spaces), ambata (sky), akasa (atmosphere), sunya (empty)..
	depth, firmament, the endless, jaladharapatha, div, Vishnu’s footprint, middle air..
	nabhas, cloud, viyat, atmosphere..
	the logic of syadvada: an argument that the world of appearances may or may not be real, or both may and may not be real – or may be indescribably; or may be real and indescribable, or unreal and indescribable; or in the end may be real and unreal and indescribable.
	is zero the mark of the empty or the empty mark?
	The Hindus’ method of computation, a counting board for calculation lightly covered with sand: dhuli-kharma, ‘sand-work’..
sunyabindu, ‘the dot marking a blank’..
	the poetics of numeracy (numerality?)
	‘yavat tavat’, abbreviated ‘ya’, means ‘as much as.  Black, blue, yellow, white, red: abbrev. as ca, ni, pi, pa, lo, as variables..
	Sunya isn’t so much vacancy, then, as receptivity, a womb-like hollow ready to swell – and indeed it comes from the root svi, meaning swelling.  Its companion ‘kha’ derives from the verb ‘to dig’, and so carries the sense of ‘hole’: something to be filled.
	Abelard of Bath..
	TRAMPOLINE (the taut fabric that holds us)

	Discourse is exactly like mathematics, math is a discourse anyway.  But what I mean is that you write down a sign, a mark, a figure and you attach to it different punctuation, different qualifications, you can change its order, rank, cardinality, etc., or name its discoverer.  All is encrypted into the number code, a forever growing organism, formal, magical, fabulous, parabolic.
	Zero/Zephyr/Chiffre/Cipher/Figura/Nihil/Circulus
	RUNES! RUNIC ALPHABET!!!

	Statics ecstasy system
	State circumstance constant constitute contrast exist, instance, institute, interstice, persist, resist, stable, stage, station, status, substance, transubstantiation
	Trace abstract attract contract distract extract portray subtract trait
	Date edition perdition render rendezvous tradition traitor treason
	Grade, congress, degrade, degree, digress, gradient, gradual, graduate, ingredient, progress, regress, retrograde, transgression
	Agent act agitate ambiguous coagulate cogitate enact exact examine exigent transact
	Final affinity confine define finite refine conform deform formula inform reform transform
	Tribe attribute contribute distribute retribution tribune tribute
	Scan ascend descend scale scandal scansion transcend
	
	Third Chamber:
	‘Ecstasy of the System: A Statics of Emotion’
	Motus, motion, movement.
	Itinerant ambient ambition circuit count exit initial initiate issue perish sedition sudden trance transient transit
	Chronicle anachronism chronology chronometer synchronism
	Picture depict paint pigment pimento pint
	Structure construct construe destroy instruct instrument obstruct superstructure
	Figure configuration effigy fiction figment transfigure
	FIGMENT OF PIGMENT:
	Vision evident provide review supervise survey varnish view visage visible visit vista visual vitreous
	REVIEW, first chamber, 
	Move commotion emotion mobile moment motion motive motor promote remote remove
	Fact affair affect counterfeit defeat defect deficient deficit difficulty effect efficacy efficient facile facsimile faction factitious faculty fashion feasible fetish feat feature infect perfect prefect proficient profit reflection sufficient surfeit
	
I need categories, leanings, groups, clusters.  They do not have to be perfectly separate categories with no seepage.  It should be organic, therefore open to seepage, to bleed-through.  Review, to Vision, first step; find the chronology, the chronometric; the state, the constants, contrasts, interstices, stages, the substance; abstract, contract, extract, manipulate the text.
Program of Movement: this is the little kernels I am after.  They are there, are real.  I know them like I know numbers.  I know that a manageable language can be invented to speak of them.  Like molecules of language, but ones with special functions.  Undercurrent negotiations, the type of stuff that feeds my schizophrenia.  The distant points of reference, the bizarroid, twisted, convex, concircular.
IN ELEVEN: 11, two straight, vertical marks.  Boundaries.  The Unnatural History of Our Numbers.  11 = 1 + 10, or 3 + 8, or 4 + 7, or 5 + 6, or 6 + 5, or 7 + 4, or 8 + 3, or 9 + 2, or 10 + 1. [or 5 + 5 + 1, 4 + 4 + 3, 5 + 3 + 3, 2 + 4 + 3 + 2, etc.]
LANGUAGE POETICS
TIME PLACE POSITION ATMOSPHERE
THEORY RENEWAL VISION
DEATH PRODUCTIVITY
[2, 4, 3, 2]

Something like that, constructive categories.  Types of categories that are analogical, work by clusters.  Each movement is made up of different mixtures of clusters, a different constellation, but made up of similar stars.
CONSTELLATIONS: brief invention on art movements
Let us say that Realism is a little structure made up of variously placed building blocks like we played with in kindergarten.  Impressionism would also be made up of those same blocks, but differently positioned, perhaps with extra ones of ones less.  These blocks are technical blocs, affective modalities, – and intertwine amongst themselves, technical blocs have affective modalities, affective modalities are technical blocs – scale of movement, motion [versus scale of emotion, aff. modality], program of movement [how the series of actions are programmed, sequenced, what are the rules of its programmation, can underpainting come after coloring? no. etc.].  So the technical blocs are put into application through a program of movement.  Affective modalities are entered into, are displaced, dispersed amongst the other elements, can also be seen as an effect of the mixture of technical elements + the sequence = affective modality, its power of affection + power of receptivity of plastic viewer.  Aisthesis, sensation.
The art movement, then, is a constellation.  This theory only works with art movements, was molded for them.  In the realm of thoughts, the history of ideas, we cannot find the same constellations, things are differently linked to actions.  An action in daily life, for example, does not so strictly flow from philosophical education, in its methods, strategies, belief systems, value systems, etc.  But an action or series of action within an art practise, this is much more specific, and does in fact work in a very mechanical manner, or can be seen this way.  The art practise is more of a clearly delineated habit.  Unlike grocery shopping and even using the toilet; during my day, I cannot plan a 2 o’clock shit, I have no control over its program of movement as a technique, an action, a mode of being.  But the application of gesso onto a neatly stretched canvas, I can begin this technique at precisely the time I choose.  Choosing habits differentiates a practise from a mere physical habit.  Habits of leisure, they could be firstly called.  Then among habits of leisure, work habits.  The workplace is more of that Room of which Heidegger speaks of the tools.  It is the spatiality of being-an-artist in his studio.  The studio has that same spatiality of Heidegger’s Room.  [Great title: Heidegger’s Room.  p.64-65]
p.56, #60 in text, talks about a “box” or “cabinet” [Being and Time]
“Strictly speaking, there “is” no such thing as a useful thing.  There always belongs to the being of a useful thing a totality of useful things in which this useful thing can be what it is.  A useful thing is essentially “something in order to…”.  The different kinds of “in order to” such as serviceability, helpfulness, usability, handiness, constitute a totality of useful things.  The structure of “in order to” contains a reference of something to something.  Only in the following analyses can the phenomenon indicated by this word be made visible in its ontological genesis.  At this time, our task is to bring a multiplicity of references phenomenally into view.  In accordance with their character of being usable material, useful things always are in terms of their belonging to other useful things: writings materials, pen, ink, paper, desk blotter, table, lamp, furniture, windows, doors, room.  These “things” never show themselves initially by themselves, in order then to fill out a room as a sum of real things.  What we encounter as nearest to us, although we do not grasp it thematically, is the room, not as what is “between the four walls” in a geometrical, spatial sense, but rather as material for living.  On the basis of the latter we find “accommodations,” and in accommodations the actual “individual” useful thing.  A totality of useful things is always already discovered before the individual useful thing.
“Association geared to useful things which show themselves genuinely only in this association, that is, hammering with the hammer, neither grasps these beings thematically as occurring things nor does it even know of using or the structure of useful things as such.  Hammering does not just have a knowledge of the useful character of the hammer; rather, it has appropriated this useful thing in the most adequate way possible.  When we take care of things, we are subordinate to the in-order-to constitutive for the actual useful thing in our association with it.  The less we just stare at the thing called hammer, the more actively we use it, the more original our relation to it becomes and the more undisguisedly it is encountered as what it is, as a useful thing.  The act of hammering itself discovers the specific “handiness” of the hammer.  We shall call the useful thing’s kind of being in which it reveals itself by itself handiness.  It is only because useful things have this “being-in-themselves,” and do not merely occur, that they are handy in the broadest sense and are at our disposal.  No matter how keenly we just look at the “outward appearance” of things constituted in one way or another, we cannot discover handiness.  When we just look at things “theoretically,” we lack an understanding of handiness.  But association which makes use of things is not blind, it has its own way of seeing which guides our operations and gives them their specific thingly quality.  Our association with useful things is subordinate to the manifold of references of the “in-order-to.”  The kind of seeing of this accommodation to things is called circumspection.” – p.64-65, Martin Heidegger, Being and Time

BEFORE the individual thing, we discover the totality of useful things.  General to particular.  Always.  Germans.  I am starting to see how phenomenology functions.  It brings things into sight that we normally would not see in this circumspect way.  We see outward appearances, we see useful things and use them, but we do not realize the way in which we see their specific handiness, not as there in the hammer, but as a phenomenon nonetheless.
It’s basically the phenomenology of theoretical spaces which I want to look at, but historically too, how they develop[ed].  That is the foundation, but then there is the theoretical spaces and how they affected practises of painting.  And a technique has a spatiality all its own, too.  The technique is a habit and habits are spatial in periodicity, not merely chronological periodicity but positional periodicity, meaning topological as well as chronological.  The technique of hammering can be moved.  Motus comes into play, motus of the modus, movement of the mode, and in the constellations, modes are moved too, they are composed of various fillings of modalities like empty columns, but columns with bleedthrough.  For instance, if I have three columns etched in the sand, I am not merely placing a stone per column: I can place a thin rectangular stone across two columns, diagonally or horizontally, vertically, as I choose it, or how the object chooses the placement of the figural stones.  It will take lots of work but I believe it is feasible at the very least to outline this program of action.  I can propose it, it might not work perfectly, but I can propose it.
An art movement does not have a concept per se.  It acts like a concept but more closely linked to an affective bloc.  It has integral elements, it has a contour, a chiffre, but is not conceptual, it is closer to technical, closer to factual knowledge than theoretical abstraction.  I can abstract the Renaissance as a concept, but what the Renaissance actual is as a mode or many modes of painting is not this concept.  We have touched an important distinction.  I write the concept Renaissance, but the Renaissance is more dispersed, is contracted too, contracted in a compact technical space, yet diffuse in its rigidity.  Meaning that the parts are closely set together, but can move from within to create variations on the Renaissance ideal.  So philosophical concepts play a part, but the art movement is made up of different cutting-outs, different circles.  Each Constellation has an encyclopedia.  Of forms [structure], of meanings [mental figuration], of technique [type of habit].  

I am having difficulty wording these ideas because I have never put these thoughts of mine into words before, these very specific thoughts, though highly abstracted, highly moveable, transitional.  You see, one cluster can itself be internally rearranged.  The clusters are part ideological, part historical, part technical.  You can dissect an art movement using dialectics, but you need many oppositions and cannot hope to unravel its entirety.  You need main blocks which overlap, form a sort of semi-chain, but more like the chain of film while it is playing through the projector.  You are witnessing the moment, the moving near-simultaneity, not the chain of causal links.  I think that art movements seen in the way I hope to see them is metaphysical, but also physical, physics + metaphysics, the whole picture.  Take Cubism for example.  It can really be said to have come about through Braque and Picasso’s work together.  They occupied the main space of its genesis.  The shapes that recur in their very analytical works resemble ancient marks, like the cuneiform wedges etched on clay tablets used for counting.  They were calculating, the Cubists.  It is a very scriptural art.  So I could see the movement as being modelled out of current ideas: work in anthropology, psychology, philosophy.  But the aesthetic as constructed, this is the technical sphere which works with habits, conventions, and though a social phenomenon, is not the same as the history of ideas.  It is more like the history of technology, of inventions.  And Design, too.  Aesthetics as the science of sensation becomes a science similar to philosophy, to structural linguistics or anthropology, or cultural studies.  Yet the content of such researches takes the form of meaningful form, of significant form, design, disegno.  The artifice is that it is not the object, as in the case of a still life.  It is not what I perceive either, but closer to what takes place on the cognitive level when I view an object with my scan path.  The painting is a result of previous awareness, perceptions.  An after-image of the perceptual act.  Techniques are means, habits towards a goal, an effect.  There are transitions between use of technique and acquired result.  The techniques are blocs, programmed movements, intentional and preservative of the initial impetus which moved one to commence the work in question.  This impetus could be called the vision, though not all painters work with this initial vision of the work in its entirety, its rhizomatic pre-formation in the mind.
Encasement is important at some point in this study.  What does the technique encase?  This here brings us to affective modalities, encased in technical blocs, operating across paintings.. the painting well into the Baroque period is a sort of window, it is a seen space, an illusory space.  It recreates visual space.  There is the field of vision as first space, then the spatiality of the theoretical eye [the mind], followed by the deceptive space of the painting.  Modernized space would be repetitive space, serial space, referential space, spatial fragments and dislocated space.  Localization and delocalization.  Something that is localized is within a positional range, within boundaries: is localized to this or that area.  Delocalized could mean that it is nomadic, vagrant, or wandering.  Modernized space is delocalized: it runs rampant, the object runs across planes, dissected diagonally, like a conic section.  [Iconic section].  
We have types of movements.  Directed movement or a movement that is certain, determinate, as well as indeterminate motions, movements, deviations, shifts, modulations, oscillations, curved paths, spirals, etc.  A bloc, and there are also several kinds of blocs, can be rigid, geometric, columnar, like a matrix, or can be closer to a cluster or constellation.  Compare an engine to a cluster of clouds.  The parts of the motor run directionally, programmatically, rigidly, while the clouds are uncertain, indeterminate, shifting instead of operating.  Operation is a type of structural integrity, consistency, cohesion, or uniformity.  Reliant elemental action.  The cloud is ambiguous, nebulous.  Compare the water being pushed through a tube to water roaming freely through a natural brook.  The tube-water or pipe-water is localized, it is still uncertainly localized, for you cannot predict with perfect accuracy where a drop of water will go, but you can infer its general guidance.  In the brook, the margin of error is greater, prospective positioning is not contained within the same experimental space.  The brook is more erratic.  Therefore, let us imitate the brook in our theoretical writings instead of the rigidity of the tube, yet really it is the water in all its containers that we wish to investigate.  Water, too, moves in blocs, though they be known as compounds, pockets, organisms, etc.  
Digression:
Nonassembly, Dispersion, scattering, diffraction, breakup, separation, branching out, fanning out, spread, scatter, radiation, divergence, sprawl, sdistribution, apportionment, delegation, decentralization, regionalization, disintegration, decomposition, evaporation, vaporization, liquefaction, dissipation, circulation, diffusion, dissemination, interspersion, spraying, sprinkling, circumfusion, dispersal, disbandment, demobilization, flotsam and jetsam, driftwood, thing transferred: disjecta membra, waifs and strays, dispersed population, diaspora.. unassembled, demobilized, dispersed, disbanded, dotted out, strung out, sporadic, sparse, infrequent, widespread, spacious, epidemic
group, constellation, galaxy, cluster, star, pride, leap, troop, swarm, flock, drove, string, unit, formation, pair, duality, quaternity, set, class, genus, species, subspecies, crowd, throng, multitude, huddle, cluster, swarm, colony – assembly, attraction, forgathering, congregation, concourse, conflux, concurrence, convergence, meeting, conventicle, convocation, synod, gemot, shire moot, legislature, conclave, council, eisteddfod, mod, festival.. symposium, conference..
periodicity, irregularity.. 
Words of Order:
Order, disorder, arrangement, derangement, precedence, sequence, precursor, sequel, beginning, end, middle, continuity [uninterrupted sequence], discontinuity [interrupted sequence], term [serial position], assemblage, nonassembly [dispersion], focus [place of meeting], class, inclusion, generality, speciality, rule, multiformity, conformity, noncomformity..
Focus: focal point, point of convergence, junction, town centre, city center, convergence, centre, focus group, crossways, crossroads, switchboard, exchange, nerve centre, hub, nub, core, heart, kernel, middle, hall, civic centre, community centre, village hall, village green, town square, campus, quad, market place, market, resort, retreat, haunt, stamping ground, club, pub, local, headquarters, HQ, depot, rallying point, standard, venue, rendezvous, trysting place, meeting place, nest, home ground, home, fireside, campfire, cynosure, centre of attraction, honeypot, attraction, place of pilgrimage, Mecca, Lourdes, Rome, Zion, promised land, goal, objective.  TO focus: centre on, converge, centralize, concentrate, focus upon, zero in on, bring to a point, point to, focus attention on.

Return to ordre-du-jour:
Abstract relations, space, matter, Intellect: exercise of the mind: formation of ideas, communication of ideas, Volition: the exercise of the will: Individual volition, social volition, emotion, religion and morality.

Abstract relations involved in this logic-philosophy-science of art history: existence, relation, quantity, order, number, time, change, causation; Space: dimensions, form, motion.
	My present location is the time of my death.  I calculate my own exact position to ward off death.  The numbers take death away.  I number myself death, I number my death, ornament it with figures, and count.  The intersecting cycles of my habits extend my death to an unreachable horizon.  But when I reach it, I am festive with bloodlust.  I drink wine.  Just as when the moon is full, I write or paint pictures.
	I would like to paint an abacus.
	The additive identity is zero, add zero to n and you get n.  The multiplicative identity is 1, multiply n by 1 and you get n.  

	10/28/02 6:06:31 PM
	At times I love to think of myself as historian, other times, not at all.  Foucauldian, yes.  I see dislocated parts scattered across large abodes of time.  These are connections which I have made in my reading practise, and are basically fictional.  But the Mona Lisa is a fictional object, is it not?  Yet it made an impact.  Therefore, my fictional objects could also make an impact.  But more than impact, they might be silent solutions.  If they make sense, use them, I say.  Forget strict logics.  We are going to go around some very carefully-planned-out-over-the-years logical forms.  The Law of the Excluded Middle, that something either is or is not, no middle position, this has often been counteracted, and I will add my own advice.  I do not want to look at a proposition and see it as true or false, so or not so.  I want to see a gamut.  In fact, I could very well call the damn book Gamut.

	Structure of the book.  Needs a short preface.  Not an outline, but a preface.  Not an introduction.  Each chapter will introduce itself.  This is important to the interdisciplinary work.  I could start with the disciplines detached, a chapter for each discipline, let’s say.  Chapter I: art history.  Chapter II: philosophy.  Chapter III: Mathematical logic.  But first I need to read more on mathematical logic.  For that, the library and the internet.  The writing will be tonal.  By tonal, I mean, all writing is tonal, but I mean tonal as a technique, tonality as a desired effect, being capable of touching and putting together elements in a text that give the reader well-carved experiences, though differing by the light of their various subjectivities.  The experiences happen first in the eye, so we are talking about visual signals, signs, in the shape of Form, line length and the lay-out of paragraphs, size and quality of the font, etc.  The words used, too, have a letter-aesthetic, scriptive aesthetic qualities, that have certain consequences in the reader.  Though an English Doctoral student may see something different in a word than, say, an undergraduate student in Engineering.  But still, it is there in the word itself.  The word is an object, it is thousands of conversations, thousands if not millions of iterations.  Each iteration of the word brought something to the word, a certain weight.  The weight, though, here in this text is digital, it is a code, and the word printed on paper is a well-laid-out splotch of ink.  But trace that word, see its history as a physical fact.  This history is not a single history and is not fully continuous.  It is broken up.  There are intervals between the times that the word was used.  There are different mediums in which it was used: speech, writing, carving, painting, etc.  In this way I could look at Latin words and phrases, Animula, tempus fugit, etc. Agnus Dei, Dies Irae.. The Mad God.. so much to say that the word’s history is a physical thing composed of a stretch of time in which two things exist: word-being-used and word-not-being-used.  There are other stretches in which a particular form of the word is used.  These last whatever length.  There is a slow transformation of the word.  This is another type of statement we can make about the word [in the framework of its history].  I can write about the particular word being used in English communities or in French communities, etc.  Different countries.  What impact did the word have?  The word Theory.  What is its history?  I have read a lot about this.  Theory could very well be the word I use. Theory’s Gamut: an unnatural history.  [or The Gamut of Theory: an unnatural history].  Unnatural because I use vernacular + bricoleurian wizardry.

A Word:
Visual impact, its form
Transforming physical form
History:
In country x, y, z
In language x, y, z
In culture x, y, z
History of its meanings [semantic]
of its visual forms
Places where it was used [linked to country, communities]
As Object:
Iteration with a physical history, as physical fact
Intervals between iterations, types and consequences of particular intervals, silences
Mediums:
Text [
Speech [vocality, tonality]
Painting [scriptor/pictor, script]
Carving [the mark]
	A Word:
Visual impact as letters, ink, etc. [aesthetic]
Personal import
Sound
Usage
Function in text [is it pivotal, counteracting, balancing, discordant, brings friction]
Its phonetic disposition, what sounds, what letters
Grammatical context, how can it be used
Range of meanings, past uses, relevant material usages [relevant instances of use]
When does the word become another word?
word-being-used versus word-not-being-used [iteration between interval, the interval, the silence being a term as important to this upset logic as the term which is the Word

	We will see, I imagine, that all words go back to the same guttural yawp in imitation of lightning or reflection of chaotic internal brewing.  The fear of community.  The pain of repetition, sadness at the eternity of a sound.  All is constantly conserved, no escape, only remainders eternal.  Was it a yawp or a screech? did prehistoric man cry?  Surely he had tears, but did he bawl his eyes out?  Laugh? play?  Surely he did some of these.  He knew his iteration from his reiteration.  When something comes Again, we feel a difference.  The Again is important, yet sad and painful.  Again is an irritant.  Once is sensation, aisthesis, Once Again is an irritant.  It is the door-to-door salesman who keeps coming back no matter how you kicked him out the door.  He pops up in a different form, wearing a different suit, selling a different product.  He’s back all the same.  This is how I see history, as condensations, reversals, inversions, contributions, modulating words, concepts, which basically all come down to a few dialectical oppositions: compact/contract/condense vs. diverse/diverge/disperse.  Open and Close are two synonyms.  Lift, fall; wax, wane; exist/non-exist; iterate/reiterate.  The fluid medium of iteration.  Though mechanical at first, after a hundred years of history, of scattering as a material laying to become a remnant, it can almost be seen as eternally being iterated, for it is bound to be being used somewhere in the world.. do you not think that the word picture right now is being used at the very least once a day?  But that’s nothing, I probably use it more than that.  With 6 billion people on the planet, countless languages, cultures, communities (a community is an inhabited area), and many more possible textual or just plainly recorded iterations of the word, could it not be possible that at every moment multiple iterations are existing?  The written ones, they are already there, constantly appearing.  But those archives only come into contact with daylight when someone or something picks them out.  The dormant memories are awakened.  The word is surely at a microscopic level of reading history.  The concept already is one a higher level, though not hierarchically, in layers, strategically.  But the layers are living synchronously.  This is the rhizome, the abstract machine.  Several lines, series, histories, living simultaneous lives.  Each line has iterations and reiterations, melodies and countermelodies, pauses, transformations (modulations, variations).  Let us state falsely that there is a single primordial history at the very beginning of time that is a pure historical progression, a infinitely short length of historical time and being that until the present and for eternity afterwards is constantly being repeated, slowly growing in multiple simultaneously iterated and reiterated lines or layers.  You can see it as a point with infinite concentric circles around it, either being produced sequentially or creating a sphere (where they could be latitudes) existing simultaneously.  This is only a projection.  A projection, to me, is a false belief.  Like the projection on the screen not truly being what it represents.  It is the representing medium, it represents, but the objects are only appearances of actual physical memories, though being re-enacted, reiterated in a new medium just a physically factual.  A projection here in this text is akin to that which an algebrist might add to an equation to find its solution.  Sometimes one must add an unrelated element, some random variable which for some magical reason helps solve the problem.  The projection is a temporary belief or image, chain of sounds, almost anything, held in a sort of suspension, italicized on in brackets, for the length of an exhibition (the exhibition is an exposition, a deliberation on a carefully chosen problematic object).  The Exhibition in Tonal Cinema, then, is a historical practise.  It looks at a historical object and through the use of projections in tonal cinema, finds solutions to the problems inherent in the history of the object, makes sense, and then we can erase the projections and be left with a remainder, a sense which was made compact and solid by the play of immaterial forces which was pure poetic tonal cinematography.  The pure inventions mingled with actual factual material and helped resolve some of its cranky edges.
	So let us choose to see history as beginning with a pure historical form that is now being perpetually repeated on multiple levels, dimensions.  This is a fiction, but with a purpose.  The purpose is to extract a certain juice from say the history of the arts.  We have works of art from antiquity till now and writings about these arts.  It is an entirely irregular history full of disruptions, interstices, reversals, inversions, catapults.. the art and the texts about the art mingle indistinguishably.  There are multiple series of echoes, soft ones and loud ones, entire systems of passing on conventional signs, be they words or images.  What seeing each work of art or art historical writing as a reiteration of a primal historical phrase, so to speak, like a musical phrase at the heart or origin of the universe expanding outwards indefinitely (how beautiful it sounds!), is that it allows us to focus on reiteration, for one, since all of history would be composed only of reiterations, no iterations, no causes, no priorities, teleologies, only one constant reiteration.  This is one of the points it makes to utilize a projection or projected offering (as though it were an offering to the guests of history, the peopled sidewalks of eternal blessings in baskets and bushels gazing independently).  

Restoration and Reduction [p.130], Completion and Comparison
Restoration: move negative terms to the other side, making them positive
Reduction: combine like terms.

In the history of painting, what are negative and what are positive terms?  You could start with anything, take anything which is remotely negative, an anti-image or a negative statement, or conceptually negativity could be dispersion, disruption, and put it to one side.  One side has the collectivity of the iterations, the other side the non-iterated, the not-being-iterated, the spaces.  See the history of the spaces (the negative history) as equally important as the iterations, the fillings, the material facts [objects as physical facts, material memories whose selves are their written proof, the law of existence is written on their flesh, substance, objects as legible signs, legible as being written, carved, painfully modelled, marked).  The only laws of history are the laws of contraction.  Dispersion and condensation, concentration and evaporation.  The Vapors, remember?  Vapors and Abysms: this is what history looks like, timorous vapors over a dark, expansive chasm.  The Cavern with shadows projected on the wall.  These are not metaphors.  These really took place.  A metaphor is not the same as a material fact like the Cro-Magnon cave painters with soapstone lamps burning on animal fat.  This truly happened.  It is a historical fact, like Napoleon (concerning his defeat to the Russians, I’m sure there are multiple histories there).  Study both the positivity and the negativity.  [Did Foucault mean this when he used the word positivity? the full collectivity of iterations, of material presences of the discursive object? though it can only be known diagrammatically, because it is so scattered, dispersed.]  SECOND: Reduce.  This could mean abstract but could also mean to discard the unnecessary.  Those material facts which do not make a loud enough sound, the infinitesimals, discard them, like in mathematics.  You see, however, that the infinitesimals are exactly the same type of useful fiction that help solve the problem that you discard afterwards.  They are Projections.  The projections are little waves.  A fraction is a wave, a series is a wave.
Complete: separate Compare: compare the positives and the negatives.  
By seeing the negatives, the impressions, the silences, absences, as objects, you are restoring them to the positive.  Then you compare the two objects.  It is the physics [mechanics] and metaphysics of silences that I am equally studying, hence the need for useful fictions, projections, which are giving a temporary voice or image to an emptiness so that it can be used.  Or else it cannot be managed in a historical study.


Make a projection which is a figure for the empty space.  Give the emptiness a diagrammatic form.
Perhaps the zeroes you add into the historical rendition are part of it (the imagery of nothing, however, of punctuation, is not entirely invented, it does have a shape, it is the ground)
PUNCTUATION or GROUND
Constellations
Clusters
Condensation, Concentration
Disparity, Dispersion, Scattering

	Heidegger was giving words to spaces.  He wrote theories of space.  Spatiality as a quality.  What happened to space over time? how did perspective develop? from what concepts of space?  Space as place, as holding a universe of things, then space as represented environment, Room, Quarter.. geometric space with its axes..

	10/29/02 7:15:22 AM
	
An adjective or predicate which contributes to an object’s sameness or difference (contraction/dispersion)

inhabited areas (the word in the different mediums, the mediums in different places, institutional, constitutional, bureaucratic, poetic, etc.)


	10/30/02 6:49:48 AM
	I want to use the very simplest of mathematical concepts in historical and philosophical writings for the reason that mathematics has been hailed as the language of the universe.  I know that it will not be easy and that I will have to warp mathematical logic a little to accommodate the unpredictable nature of man and society, but I am doing it anyway.  I need to look at sets, at operations, at algebraic expressions, equations, and graph as much as I can.  There are ways to turn written statements into numbers.  In mathematics, you can add imaginary numbers to an equation to help solve it, or add zero to one side.  I just have to figure out what are my problems.  Firstly, how does man exit from the fiery loop of unreason, of forgetting history?  How do postmodernists do the same thing as the modernists and think it is different?  But closer to home, How does Realism constitute a movement in art? how does a movement start, how does it extend itself through various levels, and what is it au juste?  Again, I have to use a graphic aid:
0————0
     0————0
          0————0
     0————0
	This is partly how I see it.  Piling lines.  Contiguous lines, coetaneous, concurrent.  Auto-referential line diagrams.  Linearity has been given a bad name.  After all, if there are lines, there is linearity.  Linearity does not only mean straight lines.  Lineament.  Delineation.  I’m losing track slightly of where I am going or what I am studying.  But this is necessary, it is necessary to understand how you will do it.  Now I must decide on what I am studying.
	Aesthetics is one, which means a philosophical understanding of art, artistic creation, etc.  I’m not so much an art historian as a theorist of art techniques.  The theory of underpainting, for instance.  But I want to also build art movements from small blocks, what I once called the concepts of art history.  The truth is that I haven’t finished studying art history, philosophy, mathematical logic, etc., and so I cannot merely start writing about this and that.  I don’t effectively have mastery over the this and the that.
	But I do have some mastery.  Color.  Color theory.  Color, a spectrum, a wheel.  I know wheels like I know Ezekiel.  Sound.  The sound of rushing water, noise, white noise.  All the frequencies.  Waves, a universe of waves, concomitant frequencies splashing in reverberations.. the Golden Section, what the hell is it?  That’s something I would like to know.  It’s ancient, Pythagorean perhaps.  It has to do with the spiral, and Deleuze makes use of it in Cinema I: the movement-image.  We are talking about axes and co-ordinate points, maps and structural topologies.  I like Bachelard’s topo-analysis, his phenomenology of intimate space.  I need some Husserl.  I have some Heidegger, Bachelard, and Gabriel Marcel.  My collection of phenomenological works needs to grow.  I also need to read some Leibniz.  I would like to read his Theodicy, for it appears that it is a spectacular work, full of Baroque bubble-within-the-bubble.
	I have a workable understanding of my concepts.  I have the right framework, only need objects to dissect.  This I find difficult.  I can study myself, my morning and afternoon bus-rides, but this takes me only so far, and as real and historical as it is, it smells of fiction to a reader.  It has the value of fiction, not philosophy.  Though philosophers have always written of their very lives, I feel I need an object other than myself.  What do I have secret knowledge of?  Music, painting, poetry.  Music especially.  Music is somehow too close to my philosophical concepts, there is no metaphor, music really is made up of points of contact and condensation, dispersions and harmonic axes with plotted, mapped points.  I want something like the study of Realism in art and philosophy and mathematics.  That’s less analogical, and could benefit more from the elucidation my concepts can provide to unlike objects.  I would like to know more about Realism in mathematics and philosophy.  I guess some reading is to be required.



From Foucault:

“We will say that an enunciation takes place whenever a group of signs is emitted.  Each of these articulations has its spatio-temporal individuality.  Two people may say the same thing at the same time, but since there are two people there will be two distinct enunciations.  The same person may repeat the same sentence several times; this will produce the same number of enunciations distinct in time.  The enunciation is an unrepeatable event; it has a situated and dated uniqueness that is irreducible.  Yet this uniqueness allows of a number of constants – grammatical, semantic, logical – by which one can, by neutralizing the moment of enunciation and the coordinates that individualize it, recognize the general form of a sentence, a meaning, a proposition.  The time and place of the enunciation, and the material support that it uses, then become, very largely at least, indifferent; and what stands out is a form that is endlessly repeatable, and which may give rise to the most dispersed enunciations.  But the statement itself cannot be reduced to this pure event of enunciation, for, despite its materiality, it cannot be repeated: it would not be difficult to say that the same sentence spoken by two people in slightly different circumstances constitute only one statement.  And yet the statement cannot be reduced to a grammatical or logical form because, to a greater degree than that form, and in a different way, it is susceptible to differences of material, substance, time, and place.  What, then, is that materiality proper to the statement, and which permits certain special types of repetition?  How is it that one can speak of the same statements when there are several distinct enunciations of it, yet must speak of several statements when one can recognize identical forms, structures, rules of construction, and intentions?  What, then, is this rule of repeatable materiality that characterizes the statement?” [p.101-102]

1.  The description of statements
“I now realize that I could not define the statement as a unit of a linguistic type (superior to the phenomenon of the word, inferior to the text); but that I was dealing with an enunciative function that involved various units (these may sometimes be sentences, sometimes propositions; but they are sometimes made up of fragments of sentences, series or tables of signs, a set of propositions or equivalent formulations); and, instead of giving a ‘meaning’ to these units, this function relates them to a field of objects; instead of providing them with a subject, it opens up for them a number of possible subjective positions; instead of fixing their limits, it places them in a domain of coordination and coexistence; instead of determining their identity, it places them in a space in which they are used and repeated.  In short, what has been discovered is not the atomic statement – with its apparent meaning, its origin, its limits, and its individuality – but the operational field of the enunciative function and the conditions according to which it reveals various units (which may be, but need not be, of a grammatical or logical order).” [p.106]
“We will call statement the modality of existence proper to that group of signs: a modality that allows it to be something more than a series of traces, something more than a succession of marks on a substance, something more than a mere object made by a human being; a modality that allows it to be in relation with a domain of objects, to prescribe a definite position to any possible subject, to be situated among other verbal performances, and to be endowed with a repeatable materiality.” [p.107]
“…discourse is constituted by a group of sequences of signs, in so far as they are statements, that is, in so far as they can be assigned particular modalities of existence.  And if I succeed in showing, as I shall try to do shortly, that the law of such a series is precisely what I have so far called a discursive formation, if I succeed in showing that this discursive formation really is the principle of dispersion and redistribution, not of formulations, not of sentences, not of propositions, but of statements (in the sense in which I have used this word), the term discourse can be defined as the group of statements that belong to a single system of formation; thus I shall be able to speak of clinical discourse, economic discourse, the discourse of natural history, psychiatric discourse.” [p.107-108]
“To describe a statement is not a matter of isolating and characterizing a horizontal segment; but of defining the conditions in which the function that gave a series of signs (a series that is not necessarily grammatical or logically structured) an existence, and a specific existence, can operate.  An existence that reveals such a series as more than a mere trace, but rather a relation to a domain of objects; as more than the result of an action or an individual operation, but rather a set of possible positions for a subject; as more than an organic, autonomous whole, closed in upon itself and capable of forming meaning of its own accord, but rather an element in a field of coexistence; as more than a passing event or an inert object, but rather a repeatable materiality.” [p.108-109]
“I am not proceeding by linear deduction, but rather by concentric circles, moving sometimes towards the outer and sometimes towards the inner ones: beginning with the problem of discontinuity in discourse and of the uniqueness of the statement (the central theme), I have tried to analyse, on the periphery, certain forms of enigmatic groupings; but the principles of unification with which I was then presented, and which consequently cannot refer either to sentences, propositions, or representations, forced me to return to the centre, to that problem of the statement; to try to elucidate what is meant by the term statement.” [p.114]
“In examining the statement what we have discovered is a function that has a bearing on groups of signs, which is identified neither with grammatical ‘acceptability’ nor with logical correctness, and which requires if it is to operate: a referential (which is not exactly a fact, a state of things, or even an object, but a principle of differentiation); a subject (not the speaking consciousness, not the author of the formulation, but a position that may be filled in certain conditions by various individuals); an associated field (which is not the real context of the formulation, the situation in which it was articulated, but a domain of coexistence for other statements); a materiality (which is not only the substance or support of the articulation, but a status, rules of transcription, possibilities of use and re-use).” [p.115]
“What has been called ‘discursive formation’ divides up the general plane of things said at the specific level of statements.  The four directions in which it is analysed (formation of objects, formation of the subjective positions, formation of concepts, formation of strategic choices) correspond to the four domains in which the enunciative function operates.” [p.116]
“2.A statement belongs to a discursive formation as a sentence belongs to a text, and a proposition to a deductive whole.  But whereas the regularity of a sentence is defined by the laws of a language (langue), and that of a proposition by the laws of logic, the regularity of statements is defined by the discursive formation itself.  The fact of its belonging to a discursive formation and the laws that govern it are one and the same thing; this is not paradoxical since the discursive formation is characterized not by principles of construction but by a dispersion of fact, since for statements it is not a condition of possibility but a law of coexistence, and since statements are not interchangeable elements but groups characterized by their modality of existence.” [p.116]
“4. Lastly, what we have called ‘discursive practise’ can now be defined more precisely.  It must not be confused with the expressive operation by which an individual formulates an idea, a desire, an image; nor with the rational activity that may operate in a system of inference; nor with the ‘competence’ of a speaking subject when he constructs grammatical sentences; it is a body of anonymous, historical rules, always determined in the time and space that have defined a given period, and for a given social, economic, geographical, or linguistic area, the conditions of operation of the enunciative function.” [p.117]

	Forgive me for having had to superfluously add length to this present document without really having written anything but only by quoting several long paragraphs.  These paragraphs, however, are extremely important as they definitely relate to what I am dealing with in this juggling of ideas in written form of which this sentence exacts a further cut.  Repeatable materiality.  Ring any bells?  I wrote of iteration and reiteration, of material facts, physical facts, material memories.  I am in fact speaking of something similar to Foucault’s statement, though I do not yet know the exact dissimilarities.  I am looking at similar groupings, or grouping in a similar way, but I do not think I am speaking of statements.  I was talking about history, but I guess history is made up of statements, though I was hoping I could speak more generally.  The thing is, what is history?  Things happen, things take place, but surely I am not willing to write about political matters like the changes in a country’s constitution because I don’t yet care about constitutive rhetoric.  I want to write about art history, philosophy, about concepts in art history and in the history of art (art history as the discourse whose object is the history of art).  But I can use Foucault when I look at art historical writings.  What constitutes a statement? what are merely enunciations?  For instance, in studies of Cubism, several facts are constantly repeated by numerous writers.  Are these statements?  They do not appear to be, considering Foucault’s formulation of the statement.  A statement in the study of Cubism would more likely be something that is looking at traits visible in several paintings, and not points from anecdotal histories.  Art history is not looking at Picasso’s Sunday dinners or what he did on his New Year’s Eves.  It has to have import concerning his art.  His art, too, must have something relevant to more than just a personal practise.  What makes Picasso’s art historical is that it served a function in a greater circle, in some level of society.  And when we look at the way things are now, Picasso has had a global influence, has affected lives and practices (museological, artistic/technical) on an international scale.  Also, Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, for instance, may very well be a statement.  It is a group of signs, therefore definitely an enunciation.  But perhaps it is a statement as well, for it could very well fall into a discourse, say, physical anthropology.  It certainly has been assimilated into others’ discourses, appropriated into the discourses of people a century away with no connection to Picasso.
	Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon is not repeatable.  It is material, has a materiality very definitely so, but can never be repeated.  It has a time and place of formation, has a physical history of distinct placements (though some may be obscure).  It resides now in a definite location.  What are the modalities of existence of a statement in painting?  If a painting can really be a statement.  

	7:56:21 PM
	The past can be immediately forgiven.  Past events can be forgiven immediately.  I forgive myself for all my past events, the life of tension and discomposure.  I am leaving my past life behind with respect for it as a path, entering my new life, a new quarter with able steps, careful, soft steps.  Now to the questions.
	I ask a question, dear Sunyabindu, power of life, of earth, of intent, I ask a simple question.  Of the various studies that I have made, what skins need to be shed and which to keep?  Focus.  The important thing to remember is Focus.  To come to a theory of focus in art, and life, one needs remembrance.  Remember the focal points.  Remember soft contacts and hard contacts.  Move gently.  Ask a slow question.  Focus: a point where light-rays meet.  (L.) L. focus, a hearth; hence, a centre of fire.  Cf. Gk. photo, light. [fuel: M. E. fewell (Barbour), O.F. fouaille, only found in fouailler, a wood-yard; Low. L, foallia, fuel. – Low L. focale, fuel – L. focus, a hearth – fuse, fusee: see fusil – fusil: a light musket.  (F.—L.) Orig. not the musket itself, but its fire-lock; also spelt fusel, fusee, fuse.  Fuse, fusee, or fusel, a pipe filled with wild fire, and put into the touch-hole of a bomb;’ Kersey (1715) – O.F. fusil, ‘a fire-steele for a tinder-box;’ Cot.—L. focile, a steel for kindling fire. – L. focus, a hearth; Der. fusil-eer.
	Fosse: (F.—L.) F. fosse. – L fossa, a ditch. – L. fossa, fem. of fossus, pp. of fodere, to dig. [fossil, petrified remains obtained by digging. (F.—L.) O.F. fossile, ‘that may be digged;’ Cot.—L. fossilis, dug up. – L foss-us, pp. of fodere.]
	Leaving chalk-marks on the side of the hearth when you’re shovelling the wood-stuffs.  Or coal in the engine, furnace, boiler room.  I am still on the train.  I still believe in the Train and the Photograph.  Some more superfluous pasting:

	1814 - C. De Lasteyrie fait diffuser en France les procédés de lithographie inventés à Munich / En Angleterre, G. Stephenson met au point sa première locomotive à vapeur / F. Koenig invente une presse à imprimer mécanique / A.-M. Ampère analyse les atomes et les molécules / France: ouverture d’une école d’arts et métiers à Angers
	1815 - R. Laennec invente le stéthoscope
	1816 - N. Niepce obtient les premières négatives par l’action de la lumière / Système de refroidissement thermique de Sterling / G. Cuvier, Le Règne animal / F. Broussais, Examen de la doctrine médicale / R. Laennec instaure la pratique de l’auscultation médicale / A Paris, invention du métronome par Mälzel
	1817 - Allemagne: R.-F. Drais, invention de la draisienne, ancêtre de la bicyclette
	1818 - Whitney invent une machine à filer / P.-J. Pelletier et J.-B. Caventou découvrent la strychnine / G. Saint-Hilaire, Philosophie anatomique (1er vol.) / M. Faraday découvre la liquéfaction des gaz / France, l’école gratuite de dessin fondée par J.-J. Bachelier devient l’Ecole nationale et spéciale de dessin, de mathématiques, d’architecture et de sculpture d’ornements appliqués aux arts industriels
	1819 - R. Laennec, De l’auscultation médiate / Travaux de L.-J. Gay-Lussac sur la solubilité des solides / J.J. Berzelius: théorie des proportions chimiques / Première traversée de l’Atlantique en bateau à vapeur, le Savannah / G.-J. Cristian, directeur du Conservatoire des arts et métiers, emploie, le premier, le syntagme <<esthétique industrielle>> dans son ouvrage Plan de technonomie
	1820 - A.-M. Ampère détermine les lois fondamentales de l’électromagnétisme / P.-J. Pelletier et J.-B. Caventou découvrent la quinine / P.F. Percy invente le fil de suture métallique
	1821 - Napoléon meurt à Sainte-Hélène / Première ligne de chemin de fer: Stockton-Darlington / A. Fresnel, Théorie ondulatoire de la lumière / Création de la Société de géographie de Paris / G. Cuvier fonde une nouvelle discipline, la paléontologie
	1822 - N. Niepce découvre la photographie / L’Anglais R. Roberts invente le métier à tisser automatique / J.-F. Champollion déchiffre les hiéroglyphes égyptiens de la pierre de Rosette
	1823 - A. Becquerel, travaux sur la thermoélectricité / Découverte du silicium par J.J. Berzelius / Makintosh fabrique le premier manteau imperméable
	1824 - S. Carnot pose les bases de la thermodynamique / F. Arago découvre le magnétisme de rotation
	1825 - Première carte géologique par E. de Beaumont et A. Duefrénoy / L. Braille met au point son système de lecture pour les aveugles / Premières voies de chemin de fer en Angleterre / J.E. Purkinje entreprend des recherches qui aboutiront à la découverte de la cellule / Etats-Unis: technique du verre moulé, qui permet de fabriquer des récipients et des bouteilles bon marché, pour répondre à l’essor de l’industrie de la brasserie, des médicaments ou de l’alimentation
	1826 - N. Niepce, héliographie sur plaque d’étain / A. Ampère conçot une théorie mathématiques des phénomènes électrodynamiques / Telford, pont suspendu par des chaînes en fer
	1827 - Loi d’Ohm sur la résistance électrique
	1828 - Première ligne de chemin de fer en France / Simpton installe à Londres le premier système d’épuration des eaux
	1829 - Première statistique de recensement par A. Quételet / Invention de la machine à coundre par Thimmonier D’Amplépuis / Invention de l’accordéon par L’Autrichien C. Demian / Le mathématicien russe N.I. Lobatchevsky élabore la géométrie non euclidienne
	1830 - G. Saint-Hilaire, Principes de philosophie zoologique / M. Faraday identifie les phénomènes d’induction / J.-I. Hittorff, Mémoire sur l’architecture polychrome chez les Grecs, qui démontre l’emploi de la couleur dans la décoration des temples grecs / Angleterre: G. Phillips publie Rudiments of Curvilinear Design, où sont reproduites deux compositions de style japonais qui montrent un intérêt précoce pour les formes orientales
	1831 - Le noyau cellulaire est découvert par R. Brown / Moteur électrique par Dal Negro / Théorie des nombres complexes de C.F. Gauss
	1832 - Moteur solaire par A. Piffre / Invention de l’hélice par F. Sauvage / Machine à calculer par C. Babbage / Eclairage public au gaz à Paris.  J. Walker met au point la fabrication de la tôle ondulée
	1833 - Angleterre: loi réglementant le travail des enfants.  Abolition de l’esclavage dans tout l’empire britannique. / M. Faraday, études sur l’électrolyse / le télégraphe électrique est élaboré par Gauss et Weber
	1834 - J. Lenz, loi sur les courants induits / Début du réseau ferroviaire en Belgique / Laurent élabore une théorie de substitution sur les composés chimiques / E. Delacroix, Femmes d’Alger dans leur appartement / Le peintre A.-G. Decamps publie en mars, dans La Revue républicaine, un article en faveur de <<l’art et l’industrie>>
	1835 - France: création de la première agence de presse par C. Havas / Attentat contre Louis-Phillipe / Loi réprimant la liberté de la presse / C. Darwin aux îles Galapagos / Automobile électrique par Davenport / W.H.F. Talbot met au point les premiers tirages photographiques sur papier à partir des négatifs / Développement de la peinture d’histoire / France: début de la fabrication en série des gants et des chaussures
1836 - Laurent: théorie des radicaux chimiques / Découverte des phénomènes catalytiques par J.J. Berzelius / I. Dubus-Bonnel invente la fibre de verre
1837 - Angleterre: avènement de la reine Victoria / La situation économique de la Banque d’Angleterre est rétablie grâce au secours de la Banque de France / Hélice propulsive mise au point par le Suédois J. Ericsson / Ruolz et Jacobi inventent le procédé de la galvanoplastie / Etats-Unis: la fabrication du verre moulé compte désormais plus de cent entreprises, produisant des objects pour tous les usages quotidiens
1838 - couronnement de la reine Victoria / A paris, premiers trottoirs asphaltés / L.-J. Daguerre obtient les premiers <<daguerréotypes>> / Première traverséa de l’Atlantique en bateau à vapeur sans voile / Théorie cellulaire des végétaux par M.J. Schleiden / Foulage mécanique de la laine / L’horloger E. Terry introduit ce type de production dans la fabrication d’horloges en bois / Premières montres américaines fabriquées en séries, sans succès
1839 - Page élabore la première locomotive électrique / La première Société d’ethnologie est créée à Paris / Découverte de la vulcanisation du caoutchouc par C. Goodyear (mis au point en 1842 par T. Hancock).  Elle va permettre la fabrication d’une matière élastique mais également d’une matière dure, l’ébonite / Le procédé photographique tombe dans le domaine public / Mise au point du tube de peinture souple par les frères Lefranc / Bicyclette à manivelle de Macmillian / P.-J. Proudhon, Qu’est-ce que la propriété? / France: E. Chevreul, chimiste spécialisé dans l’industrie textile et attaché à la manufacture des Gobelins, publie De la loi du contraste simultané des couleurs.  Cet ouvrage aura une grande influence sur la peinture moderne, mais aussi sur l’industrie, qui tirera grand profit de ses conclusions / A Paris, Exposition des produits de l’industrie française au carré Marigny.  Après la dénonciation de l’éclectisme à la péceédente exposition (=>1834), les ébénistes mutiplient leurs recherches à partir de matériaux divers en puisant leur inspiration dans l’utilisation qui en a été faite par les grands ébénistes anciens (marqueterie, laque…).
1840 - Angleterre: W.H.F. Talbot, brevet du procédé négatif-positif permettant d’obtenir des photographies sur papier / L’expédition Dumont s’Urville en Antarctique découvre la terre Adélie.  En Angleterre, édition du premier timbre-poste gommé, le penny black.  Première horloge électrique par A. Bain / Lampe à incandescence de Grove / Le système métrique est rendu obligatoire en France
1841 - Joule formule une loi sur l’énergie électrique / Normalisation du filetage par J. Whitworth / Début de l’automatisation des machines-outils / J.-A.-D. Ingres, esquisses pour L’Age d’or, oeuvre destinée au salon de style néo-classique du salon du château de Dampierre
1842 - La frontière entre les Etats-Unis et le Canada est fixée par la traité Webster-Ashburton / Le Traité de Nankin met un terme à la guerre de l’Opium et donne Hong-Kong aux Anglais / La manufacture de papier peint Leroy met au point le cylindre gravé en creux / L’engrais artificiel est utilisé pour la première fois pour la culture de navets / J. Nasmyth invente le marteau-pilon / G. Boole, théorie des variants / Premier périodique illustré à Londres / J.-A.-D. Ingres se voit confier une importante commande de vitraux (réalisés par la manufacture de Sèvres) pour la chapelle commémorative de Neuilly élevée en mémoire du duc d’Orléans / Angleterre: W. Dyce, Drawing Book of the Governement School of Design, le premier et le plus complet des manuels de dessin décoratif industriel.  Dyce fut l’un des premiers à s’inspirer de la botanique pour concevoir des ornements / Etats-Unis: C. Jerome fabrique des horloges en série avec des éléments obtenus par emboutissage de feuilles de métal
1843 - J.-P. Joule, principe d’équivalence des formes de l’énergie / La manufacture française des tabacs produit des cigarettes / S. Morse, installation d’une première ligne télégraphique Washington-Baltimore / J. Ruskin, Modern Painters
1844 - Première anesthésie chirurgicale, par Wells.  Keller réalise un papier à partir de pulpe de bois.  G. Massicot conçoit une machine à découper le papier.  Polonceau invente le rouleau compresseur. [I find it very funny that the same year Keller made the first paper from wood pulp someone else invented the paper shredder.  It’s very ironic.] / Le serrurier A. Fichet conçoit le premier coffre-fort.
1845 - Irlande: début de la grande famine.  Angleterre: loi rus l’éligibilité des Juifs / Variation de la hauteur du son découverte par Fizeau-Doppler / M. Faraday étudie la polarisation de la lumière / Construction à Boston du premier clipper; le Great Britain traverse l’Atlantique en quatorze jours.  Première route oudronnée a Nottingham / C. Baudelaire, Salon de 1845, dans lequel il défend l’esthétique romantique et la photographie / E. Delacroix, Le Sultan du Maroc; orientalisme et romantisme se mêlent étroitement
1846 - En Irlande, la famine fait plus d’un million de morts / Découverte de la planète Neptune par J. Adams et U. Le Verrier / Création de l’Ecole française d’Athènes / Sobrero fabrique la nitroglycéine / Invention du saxophone / Robinson invente l’anénomètre à coupelles, un appareil destiné à mesurer la vitesse du vent
[Lana, you’ve got it all wrong, I’m not putting pressure on you, I only feel the need to constantly tell you things because when I say things you have an air on your face that I am a nuisance]
1847 - France: cris économique et financière / Invention du réveille-matin par l’horloger français A. Rieder / J.E. Lundstörm invente les allumettes dites de sûreté (Suède) / Le principe de la conservation de l’énergie est établi par H.L. Helmholtz / Farmer met au point une locomotive électrique / Utilisation du chloroforme en chirurgie par Simpson / T. Couture, Les Romains de la décadence: triomphe de la peinture d’histoire monumentale
1848 - Louis-Napoléon Bonaparte est élu président.  Abolition de l’esclavage.  Colonisation de l’Algérie / Europe: série de mouvements révolutionaire / Invention du ventilateur par Fabry / J. Bogardus, producteur de fonte, réalise le premier immeuble à structure métallique à New York / Chemin de fer Paris-Dieppe / H. Bayard perfectionne la photographie sur papier avec le talbotype / Une locomotive à grande vitesse est mise au point en Angleterre par T.R. Crampton / Angleterre: fondation de l’Association préraphaélite (The Preraphaelite Brotherhood) par J.E. Millais, W.H. Hunt, et D.G. Rossetti.  Plus structurée que les Nazaréens, elle se réfère comme eux au peintres du Quattrocento / G. Courbet, Un enterrement à Ornans (terminé en 1850).  L’artiste transforme un sujet banal en une scène monumentale digne de la peinture d’histoire

	We have here the years 1814-1848.  An interesting period.  Blake, Beethoven, Kierkegaard, Chopin.  Tolsoy.  Quite the history, this 19th century.  Photography and Locomotion running side by side, developing with the new visions of the world.  Blake’s illustrations of the Book of Job, his Marginalia and Description of a Catalogue.  Very much in the vein, in the recast Renaissance (une défaisance renée).
	Crypts.  A chapter on stucco.  Stucco, a Baroque fool.  Leibniz, Spinoza, Kant: Hegel, Beethoven, Liszt.. from internal piping to steel plates to frazzled explosive energy.  Mount Etna seen from space on the cover of the Gazette.  Excellent journalism.  If only the people could get into this business of reporting.  Is reportage not from people?  Reportage.  Newspaper.  Photography.  Science.  Philosophy.  Focus, the Lens, the Diaphragm.  Materiality.  Periods like clay tablets [historical periods].
	Biology and Chemistry.
	Between Enamel painting, Tai Chi, and the Clay I just molded, this day has been a full day.  A day with the elements.  The Novel: The Elements, Contact, Transition, Focus, Interval, Islands.. Bookkeeping, the ancient art of bookkeeping.  The Sumerian clay tablets.

	10/31/02 8:32:40 AM
	Dr. Lamoureux, Doctor Laporta, David Dellesandro, Sigrid Rusch, Colin Young, these new figures in my life.  I want to start with a new breath.  This is my twenty-fifth year [cardinal number].  So on with the questions.
	How does Design come about, or how does it inform the figurative art of painting?  Perhaps these are what I am looking at, these invisible things are Designs.  The word Focus comes from the Latin focus, but the Greek photo.  Photograph, the painting can easily be called photograph: it is another way of writing with light.  When we think of Realism, we immediately assume the words true-to-life.  Realism, today, is a sort of painting that is realistic, that is photographic.  But there are paintings from the Renaissance that greatly surpass the realism of Realist paintings in the nineteenth century.  The Renaissance is when this way of viewing Realism actually came about.  But Realism in painting, as a movement, was different.  It was more about painting subjects that were true to life, not merely technically.  The technique of many Realist paintings is not photographic, it is highly subjective, quite modulated.  By the way, I love my reproduction of the stamp, my Queen Elizabeth on 8 cent Canadian Stamp.
	
	11/08/02 8:13:56 AM
	TECHNIQUE AS HABIT WHOSE IDENTITY IS THEORETICAL:
	There are different kinds of habits.  Some are tendencies of physical matter.  For instance, we could say that the water cycle is a habit, as well as photosynthesis.  It is definitely a tendency for water and sunlight, nature, to work in this way.  Anything cyclical will immediately turn us onto its great possibility for being a habit.  There are micro- and macro-habits.  A technique is a habit, a strategy is a habit.  But these are not all the same kind of habits.  Grooming is a habit, but of what sort?  Does it not differ from the habit of eating when I am hungry?  So the human being, in particular, has physical needs that are tendencies, habits, (I like the word inclination for this) and other habits which are contracted in a different way.  If I do not eat, I risk dying.  There is a habit for self-preservation.  My main habit is continuance, and for this I can resort to several means.  I can seek to procreate, to disseminate, this being a primordial habit of man.  When man is sick, he seeks a community to spread his illness.  This is a fact of the viral world.  This can help us see contamination in a new light.  I fear contamination because contamination is a fact of life.  It is human to contaminate, to disperse his parts, his nature.  It always comes back, right, as in karmic laws?
	Energy.  We are made up of energy, of information.  Energy, being definable, is a form of information.  Everything can be translated into some sort of statement or expression.  If I can sense something, it is information to my brain.  

	6:22:55 PM
	Activities, the rumble of voices at the market.  Walk to the store, walk to the University.  Exchange, visit, encounter.  Habits of having: to possess, to seek to possess, to be possessed.  Habits of need, habits of choice.  Ephemeral habits (habits of occasion, of convenience, of opportunity), chronic habits; habits that bring good, others that bring bad (that augment your power to act or that diminish your power to act or be affected).  Hypersensitive people have a strong power to be affected and may actually seek destructive habits to dull the intensity.  Habits have varying intensities.  A single habit can be rumbling in the backroom of the brain or submerging the self so deeply into the habit that nothing else remains but the habit at a point where I = Habit.
	The immediacy of the habit.  How close it is.  The surmounting moment, the crash and wave curl, plastic edge in a crest. 
  
A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
