CUBISM III:
06/20/02 10:25:11 PM
***
	Introductory observations:
	It is time now that an essay be commenced, or a series of essays I should say, that will treat particular aspects of the discursive field of Cubism in no particular order, and that each essay is complete in itself, so that the parts are wholes, have the integrity as the entirety of the cycle of descriptive essays.  I cannot say how many there will be; there will be as many as there are sides to Cubism.  I will try to disperse throughout my imaginative scribblings as many anchors to specific historical documents as I can, historical documents being: a)particular works of arts or groups of them made by cubist painters, b)theoretical or historical writings by artists, critics, theorists, etc., of the last hundred years.  I will try to trace the concept of Cubism in a collection of essays beginning now.

	I:	The When of Cubism:
	To give dates to an art movement is like giving statistics [as a rhetorical figure],
	To give dates to an art movement is merely a tool one uses to make a specific statement.
	Different dates and different periods are significant for different reasons in the history of Cubism.  Depending on what you’re concentrating on, 1905 might be an important year, or 1890 for that matter.  It really depends on what you want to say, what you’re looking for, or what you’ve already found.
	It is convenient for some to say that Cubism began in 1907 with Les Demoiselles D’Avignon and ended somewhere in the mid-1920s.  These statements give a precise date for the beginning of Cubism, with a first work of art, and are not specific as to when it ended.  Other statements say that Cubism only began being recognized as a movement in the early 1910s.  What is a beginning?  What is an art movement, is it something with a beginning and an end?  I would like to look at the art movement known as Cubism and see what it can tell us with its special dates, what it can tell us about itself and about art movements themselves.
	1910-1912
	1919-1920
	1920-1924
	
-the problem of periodization, read essay that Lana has on periodization
	
	You can look at Cubism as a period in itself, as part of a greater period, say ‘modernism’, or as a group of short periods like 1907-1910, 1910-1914, 1919-1920, 1920-1924 – you can see Cubism as a group of different mediums, painting, literature, sculpture, theatre, film, photography – you can look at Cubism as different groups of painters – different series [groups] of paintings – groups of elements within a painting – groups of writings on Cubism – political groups of the period – market forces [groups] of the period art market – SO THEREFORE WE WILL HAVE TO WRITE ABOUT A THEORY OF GROUPS, OF SERIES, OF SETS IN ART HISTORY: [look at Foucault’s Archaeology of Knowledge, look at systems of dispersion, then read Symbolic Logic, continue until you get into propositional calculus – it is now time that I actually do what I’ve been talking about forever, the textbook of forms of art history, but not intuitively anymore, now I am doing it exactly, with a method, Tonal Cinema is becoming a stricter method, but a loose one -- 

	II	Cubism and Time:
	Some critics when writing about Cubism mention time as a factor in their technique, usually something along the lines of the multiple viewpoint theory, or something about the painter moving around the object while he painted it, hinting at TIME, at the movement of the painter in TIME, of the different shapes, appearances an object has in TIME, through TIME.
	But what is Time for our purposes?  What was Time in the first decade of the twentieth century?  What was time, particularly, to the Cubist painters? [By the way, I have chosen to capitalise the C of Cubism and Cubist in these essays only because it is my theme, not for any other reason, not because I think it is the greater concept, etc.]  We read in Martin Heidegger in 1927, who, surely enough is not a Cubist nor French, but who wrote quite a bit in Being and Time about, yes, you guessed it, Time.  What interests us here is his concept of temporality.  There are many concepts in this book that have to do with time, in fact, all the concepts in the book have some temporal element because existence is temporal whatever way you want to look at it.  Temporality, according to Heidegger, is… Now, taking Heidegger’s 1927 formulation of temporality and looking back at Cubist works of 1910 [period of heavy breaking up of image, when was it? angular lines, strong breaking lines?], can we see anything similar to this concept of temporality?  If we looked at these paintings as complete abstractions, forgetting that they represented objects / subjects, could they possibly be formulations of temporality?
	The movement, the gesture, the line, time, linearity, non-linearity, thought, concept,

	III	Names and Cubism: Cubism and the name
	The guy who called it analytic and synthetic, the name ‘cubism’, petits cubes, look for the book where they say cube was first used in 1901, in 1905 in art criticism discourse + the naming of techniques, names like ‘papier collé’, ‘collage’, etc. [ready-made], name of critics & painters	

	IV	Brief Exposé of The Politics of early 20th-century France:
	This is actually going to be a little mélange of some of the ideas going around turn-of-the-century Europe, not just France, and possibly the whole world too.  It is an important time in history and perhaps not for the reasons we would think at first.  Common sense says it was the dawn of a new age, but to me the most significant thing about this period is freedom of press [? something like that, some twist]… anarchism, anti-nationalism / nationalism, communism, republicanism, syndicalism, the left and the right, the Dreyfus Affair, sectarianism, anti-clericalism, laws, 

	V	Preliminary concepts and Techniques:
	techniques: collage - talk about collage as juxtaposition, as splicing, as having the same qualities as montage, like that of possibly being dialectical, read about montage, Eisenstein, other film theorists of the time - talk about the techniques of cubism and relate them to Foucault techniques in new history - think about it, collage, Benjamin was doing that in Passagenwork, different tones, it’s what I wanted to do with my English Textbook of Art History Forms - make buildings out of text, collages of text, really get a good feel for the different aesthetical qualities of different lay-outs - different lexicons, sociology and how the lexicon looks, how a page of text from Gray’s anatomy looks different than a page of text from a Physics textbook - representation, breaking the transcendental subject by diffusing perspective - this is all the same as Deleuze and Foucault to me - post-modernism IS modernism to me -
	Techniques: deformationism / primitivism / abstraction - collage / papier collé / faux bois / granular textures in paint [adds materiality, texture, three-dimensionality, thickness] -
	dispersions, hinting that there was an irruption, a scattering inside an event, a scattering-event, event-cluster, the event is the cluster - allegory and clusters, enclosures / constellations / 
	History of Collage, I need to have more pictures of Cubist paintings / constructions to look at and study. 

	VI	Braque and Picasso’s silence about the nature of cubism and its possible correlation to their popularity
	[Cubism and The Popular]

	VII	Politics of Criticism & dealership : Picasso’s supremacy over others, the different groups of cubists, Appolinaire’s different kinds of Cubism, my own spectral Deleuzian view of Cubism techniques and looks, aesthetic of constant transformation, the scale of tones of Cubism -

	VIII	Multiple Viewpoint theory - some mathematics, David Hilbert, calculus, algebra, logical forms, the abstracting of forms, Cubism as representation, but analytical as in differential or integral calculus, emphasize CALCULATION, the concept of, + just how they broke down the forms, abstracted forms from their subjects, from objects, people they made portraits of - Leibniz, calculus, algebra vs. semiotics, some technical stuff you’ll need later on in the essays - perspective [that book on Non-Euclidean Geometry and Modern Art by what’s-her-name] [CUBISM AND THE NEW GEOMETRY]
		

	IX	1907-1909 - influence of Fauvism, the beastly, deformation (deformation / manipulation / interpretation would go through entire movement - take out book on Synthetic Cubism as fluctuant representation) - 1911-1914, collage, expansion of techniques, 2D more towards 3D, paper sculptures (the lost paper sculptures) -

	X	Film and the camera, Bergson, Einstein, Time, Space, physics -
	One often asks oneself, when was Photography born?  One immediately thinks, in the 19th century.  But when exactly?  When can it be said that such a thing as Photography began existing on its own as a domain?  There are many answers to these questions, and one is generally under a lot of pressure to find the appropriate way of treating these answers.
	When was film first considered an independent practise?  When did the single, static photograph become a series of moving pictures?  And what are the philosophical implications of these moving pictures, if any?  The picture did not mysteriously begin moving all on its own.  There were countless efforts, and many failed attempts, in producing what we now unquestioningly call The Film.
	Henri Bergson is said to have critiqued film in one of his essays.  Bergson, today, has been linked to Cubism in more than one essay.  What link could Bergson possibly have with Cubism?  What link might the camera or film have with Cubism, or with Bergson?  What ideas could be seen circulating in and around Paris at the turn of the 20th century?  Einstein published his general theory of relativity in 1905 [check date].  I have also seen the theory of relativity linked with Cubism through the intermediary of new concepts of space.  Certain thinkers had been forging a path away from the strictures of Euclidian geometry.  New spaces were being mapped.  Modern physics and modern mathematics were beginning to erupt onto the scene.  Had these new ideas any influence on Cubist painting?  Can it be said that one discursive practise influences another?  Can a physicist truly influence the outcome of the work of a painter?
	Robert Mark Antliff published an essay in the winter of 1988 titled “Bergson and Cubism: A Reassessment”.  It appeared in Art Journal [vol., no.].  A reassessment requires that an assessment was once made, or that at the very least some connection was once made between Bergson and Cubism.  There are, in fact, a few such undertakings: Ivor Davies, “Western European Art Forms Influenced by Nieztsche and Bergson Before 1914, Particularly Italian Futurism and French Orphism,” Art International, 19:3 (March 1975) / George Beck, “Movement and Reality: Bergson and Cubism,” The Structuralist, 15/16 (1975-76) / Timothy Mitchell, “Bergson, Le Bon, and Hermetic Cubism,”, Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 34 (Winter 1977).
	
	I think that necessarily, modern physics and modern art was rent with many intersections in the twentieth century.  Some still believe that there exists no correspondence between the arts and sciences and though I agree that those fields are not guided by a one to one relationship, I do object that one of the realizations that affected Cubism was similar to those that forever changed the landscape of physics.
	Were physicists not realizing the importance of the Observer?  Is not an Observer necessary for measurement?  Is a painting not made up of measurements, of contrasts, and therefore of relative values?  The Cubism enterprise was not about creating multiple viewpoints.  I believe that what is closer to the truth is that Cubism created a relativity, painted an object without measurement, kept in the safety of its innocence before scientific reason implements it into a mathematical system.
Perspective is a signifying system.  A painting, being an object, cannot be detached from the laws of perspective.  Anything seen is already in the Eye’s signifying system.  Cubism, then, did justice to the Eye.  It made this statement: that the Eye can be any color, can be anywhere, can belong to any Observer.  It was one of the many focal points in the history of art where the Observer was realized.  It was understood with clarity that the painting as object was to be viewed.
Painting is always a matter of Vision.  It is THE Matter of Vision.  


	What can be a possible formulation of the Fourth Dimension?

Cubism and Space:
	…	

	XI	The concept of Cubism is ALL of these things and yet NONE of these things - if it is a concept, it is a philosophical concept - use Deleuze & Guattari’s concept of Concept - use it to explain the problems the Cubists were facing, the problems WE face now studying Cubism, that double or exponential staring at the problem of modernity, or triple: from pre-modern to modern to post-modern - concepts, show how these work together in Cubism: time, space, form, mark, variation, structure, primitivism, line, shade, color, texture, abstraction, tone, light, hardness, truth-value, position, subject, object, geometry, multiplicity, music, allusion, subject matter, material, camouflage, tableau-tableau, table, reflexivity - creation, temporality, avant-garde => NOW: my concept now is + [including] the criticism, early and late criticism (1910s, 1920s, 1930s, 1940s, 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, 2000s, on the 10th decade of criticism now) - for these criticisms are the documents that formed our concept of Cubism - emphasize the body of written / explanatory work on Cubism as opposed to the actual works of Cubist art and how both together form a unity, art + criticism, a dialectic of sorts, remember how you worded it in your metaphysic of art movements. [Metaphysics of Art Movements, necessary ambiguity, left-and-rightism, 

	XII	Exhibitions, major exhibits, the Salon, brief history, Baudelaire’s Salon of 1858, etc.
	The Salon as institution, birth of the University, the guild system, the newspaper - [Diderot’s Salon, the function of the Salon, the Salon today vs. the Salon of early-20th-century]

	XIII	Linear perspective, Renaissance perspective, one-point perspective, a short explanation of what it is, how it works, and its influence in engineering draft drawing in the 1920s, Bauhaus and Design, Design is an important thing at this point in time - Cubism is not design, but I’m sure I can find a way that it could have influenced design - like its subdued color schemes in the first period, this was taken up by design, talk about those books full of color schemes for graphic artists, those schemes came from modern art -

	XIV	Cubism and semiology: negative syntax: Paper Collage and Circulation of the Sign
		…
	XV	Sites of criticism for Cubism:
		Newspaper, exhibition notes, books, essays in journals, personal journals / diaries, institutions, colleges, universities, press rooms, dissertations, cafés, the Salons, 
	XVI	Picasso chronology:
	1904, definitely makes Paris his home , 13, place Ravignan, at the Bateau Lavoir, where he lives 5 years.  Meets Jarry, Raynal, Salmon, Reverdy.
	1905, meets Apollinaire who consecrates an article on him in La Plume.  Frequents the circus and the coullisses.  Beginning of Rose peiod.  Voyage to Holland.  Stchoukine buys 50 large canvases from him up until 1914.  Meets Leo and Gertrude Stein.  Engraves, between 1904 and 1905, 16 eaux-fortes, Les Saltimbanques, published by Vollard.  Numerous sculptures.
	1906, portrait of Gertrude Stein.  Begins Les Demoiselles d’Avignon.  Spends summer at Gosol (Andorre, Andora).  Juan Gris arrives in Paris.  Cézanne dies.
	1907, Finishes Les Demoiselles.  <<Epoque nègres>>.  Apollinaire introduces Braque to Picasso.  
	1908, Creation of Cubism.
	1909, Spends summer in Horta de Ebro.  Beginning of Analytic Cubism.  Exhibits in Munich at Thannhauser.  First Futurist manifesto written in Milan, published in Paris in Le Figaro.
	1910, Summer at Cadaquès (Spain) with Derain.  Death of Henri Rousseau.  Mondrian arrives in Paris.
	1911, Summer at Céret (Pyrénées orientales) with Braque.  First exhibition at Gallery 291 in New York.  Introduces letters of the alphabet in his paintings.  Illustrates a text by Max Jacob called Saint Matorel.  First salle Cubiste at the Salon d’Automne and the Salon Indépendants.  Foundation of the Soirées de Paris.  Commemorative exhibition of Henri Rousseau’s work at the Indépendants.  Munich: first Cavalier Bleu exhibition.
	1912, Summer at Sorgues (Vaucluse) with Braque.  Synthetic Cubism.  First papiers collés.  Section d’Or exhibit in Paris.  Gleizes and Metzinger publish Du Cubisme.
	1913, Summer at Céret with Braque, Juan Gris, and Max Jacob.  Illustrates Siège de Jérusalem by Max Jacob.  Apollinaire publishes Les Peintres Cubistes.  Moscow: Larionov, the Rayonnist manifesto.  Suprematism of Malevich.  New york: exhibitionj of international modern art called the Armory Show; 110 works, of Ingres and Delacroix to Duchamp, Matisse, and Picasso.  Berlin: first German Salon d’Automne with participation of strangers (participation étrangère).
	1914, Cubism begins to use vivacious colors.  Ma Jolie.  Spends summer at Avignon.  Marcel Duchamp creates first ready-mades.  Piet Mondrian in Holland.  First neo-plasticist canvases.  London: Wyndham Lewis, the vorticist review Blast.
	1915, Portraits of Max Jacob and Vollard.  Italy: De Chirico, metaphysical painting.
	1916, 

	THE PATHETIC AND THE TRAGIC:
	…
	XVII Les Demoiselles d’Avignon: Colonialism / Anticolonialism [Picasso as Immigrant]
	Narrating the Nation: Picasso and the Myth of El Greco
	p.31, Picasso and the Spanish Tradition “It is my contention that Picasso denies rather than confirms a stable aesthetic discourse of cultural nationalism in fin-de-siècle French and Spanish art.  Locating the Demoiselles within a wider field of cultural criticism, I want to suggest that Picasso does not merely compete with his predecessors formally, but calls into question historical and temporal constructions of national visual traditions through a practise that is also textual.  The bodies of the five demoiselles constitute the site where this practise is negotiated.  As Picasso elides and overlays signifiers of cultural tradition in French and Spanish art, national history is not so much written, but unwritten, pulled apart.  Picasso’s “ladies” inhabit the space where multiple and contradictory texts converge.”
	p.33, “If the Demoiselles d’Avignon has consistently thwarted efforts toward a unitary interpretation, it is because Picasso’s aesthetic operations de-center meaning.”
	He uses the terms discursive formation without at all mentioning Foucault.  Foucault did something special, he created fully influential concepts, the sort of thing that a colonialist would have dreamt of, and even better, he makes them obscure enough that you can’t use them without 200 pages of explanation.  The Whole of Foucault’s art is needed to explain any given Part.  In other words, there is no possibility of metonymy in Foucault.  In other words, there is no part, only a Whole.  And it is possible that part of the problem people have had in criticising Foucault is this very fact that you cannot even take a single word without carrying every other word with it in one long, necessary descriptive chain.
	Miquel Utrillo’s book Domenikos Theotokopulos “El Greco” [Barcelona, 1906], should try to find it someday.  I should also learn more about Utrillo.  I saw his paintings at the Museum of Fine Arts of Montreal a few years ago and fell in love with them.  They are some of the greatest paintings I have ever seen, and I was immediately influenced by them, by the dirty walls of the city houses.  [Quebec society has a tendency to alienate its Quebecois painters.  See if Borduas or Riopelle ever wrote or spoke about this]
	p.36, “Picasso’s layering of visual texts to construct a fractured historical narrative is evident in his life-long exploration of the practise of variation.  His quotations from several, often antithetical, traditions in a single work frequently involve an operation of displacement that resists fixed meanings.”
	a voluptuous black Venus, the colonial signifier of “savage,” unbridled sexuality
	p.37, “If the Parisian art market held out the promise of international public recognition, it exacted a tribute that threatened to displace Spanish artists from indigenous cultural practises or, conversely, insisted upon remaking what was perceived to be their “native” character.  Indeed, Picasso was immediately identified as a “Spanish” painter in Paris, and thus experienced first hand the process through which the market negotiates in national identity as a cultural commodity.”
	Over the last one hundred years, tradition has been carefully annihilated.  What is a painter to do without a tradition to belong to?  I sit in front of my canvases and I have no idea what subject to paint, I know not what treatments to use, and this in part due to the destruction of tradition.  Culture is necessary to human life and culture cannot exist for very long without tradition.  Tradition.  It has become a loaded word, it means for many patriarchy and fascism.  But what are you doing?  The new tradition has been to circumvent tradition, a great anti-tradition.  My suggestion is that we put aside our pride and pretentiousness and return to whatever point we can find in our traditions and continue from there.  Abstract art would have to be where tradition was lost, although it did create a new tradition, but without rules.  A tradition is a discourse.  Are we saying that we should no longer create discourses?  I feel it is the critic’s fault, for the critic has caught painters in a trap.  Stop your mangy gropings.  Let us keep our traditions.  Perhaps tradition is not necessary to other disciplines, but as a painter, I must attest to the fact that I need a tradition to guide me.
	“The Demoiselles d’Avignon and Dionysian Destruction,” Arts Magazine, October 1980, pp.94-101 / Ron Johnson
	Mark Rosenthal, “The Nietzschean Character of Picasso’s Early Development” Arts Magazine, October 1980, pp.87-91
	Onwards to Cultural renewal! please! we must!
	We cannot merely critique culture, we must create it, renew it!
	My greatest fear is that we will critique culture to the point of killing it, and never continue creating culture.  “The Invention of Tradition”, Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, eds., Cambridge University Press, 1983) / The Theory of the Avant-Garde, Renato Poggioli, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968 /
	p.59, “Using the El Greco myth as a critical point of entry to deconstruct the identity of the nation, I would argue that rather than affirming a stable discourse of artistic origins, Picasso’s practise calls into question the ideological and rhetorical structures through which national identities were constructed in fin-de-siècle Spain.  Acutely aware of his outsider status as an Andalusian in Barcelona and as a Spaniard in Paris, Picasso viewed artistic nationalism with a critical eye from a mobile perspective.  In juxtaposing traditional, modernist, and exotic signifiers in Les Demoiselles d’Avignon; in disrupting the temporal, rhetorical, and ideological constructions through which the discourse of nationalism was secured in French, Catalan, and Castilian art and art criticism, Picasso brought into focus the object of a true historical criticism—the writing of history.  For Picasso neither preserves nor destroys tradition in the bodies of his demoiselles.  He oversteps boundaries, overlays past on present, and, in the process, explodes cultural myths.  Writing in 1911, the Cubist critic Roger Allard located Picasso’s “violent personality… resolutely outside the French tradition.”  Had he extended his observations to Picasso’s critical interpolation of artistic tradition in Spain, he would have approached a fuller understanding of the ways in which Picasso inverted the body-politic of the nation as he wrote history in the present tense.”

	The Spanishness of Picasso’s Still Lifes:
	“the First World War’s devastating proof of the consequences of nationalism”
	Today we have a spectacular intellectual front, the Quiet Avant-Garde.  We have an Arrière-Avant-Garde.
	“From the spring of 1904, when, at the age of 22, he decided to settle in Paris for good, until 8 April 1973, when he died in Mougins, Picasso lived in France as a displaced Spaniard who would allude in countless ways to the culture that had initially nurtured him south of the Pyrenees.  As a child in Málaga and La Coruna and as an adolescent in Madrid and Barcelona, his formative experiences encompassed the height and breadth of the Iberian peninsula as well as a regional variety that extended from Andalusia, Galicia, and Catalonia to the Castilian capital itself.  Thereafter, the holiest Spanish trinity of great masters—El Greco, Velázquez, and Goya—constantly haunted his figural inventions, whether he dealt with the suicide of a Catalan friend, Carles Casagemas; the hallucinatory vision of a brothel parlor in Barcelona’s red-light district; the bombing of the Basque capital, Guernica; or the corpses photographed in a Nazi concentration camp.  And in the ostensibly less ambitious and less emotionally wrought territory of still lifes in two and three dimensions, Picasso, for some seventy years, would equally reveal, in a dazzling variety of overt and covert ways, his affinities to Spain.  Not only did he perpetuate pictorial traditions that the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century masters of Spanish still life, from Sánchez Cotán to Meléndez, had defined; but by willful choices of objects, words, and even colors, he could disclose, sometimes obviously, sometimes cryptically, his continuing allegiance to his Spanish birthright.  it is this question, the Spanish accent, both loud and subtle, of the master’s still lifes, that I hope to explore here.” [p.62-62, Picasso and the Spanish Tradition]
	Cubism as Pop Art, in Kirk Varnedoe and Adam Gopnik’s [eds.] Modern art and Popular Culture, New York, Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1990
	the spectacle of the corrida [what is the corrida in Spain?]
	Linda Nochlin, “Picasso’s Color: Schemes and Gambits”, Art in America 68, no.10, Dec. 1980
	a street in Barcelona’s red-light district, Carrer d’Avinyó /
	an Assumption in a brothel [p.77]
	Lewis Kachur, “Picasso, popular music and collage Cubism (1911-12),” Burlington Magazine 135, no.1081 (April 1993)
	
	Vanitas breakfast piece, a cannibal’s breakfast plate with a human skull.

	XVIII	The Body Politic: markings and demarcations
	XIX	Why young artists feel the need to dismantle traditions of the past:
	Inter-generational vacuity… The Tradition of Anti-tradition: Anti-traditionalism as tradition / myth of progress, of truth, of breaking down the walls, an illusion of a restricting tradition, laziness, The whole game of a tradition in an art form is to have severe restrictions and it is up to each artist to do something innovative within the tradition.  We have broken every tradition in painting and necessarily so.  But we must go back to the traditions with our new knowledge of representation, of signification, of iconography, and see how we can, for instance, paint a cityscape and manage to express all our new insights into discourse, culture, etc.
	Nationalism, Monarchism, Clericalism, Anarchism, anticlericalism, anarcho-syndicalism, communism, -- Vexing Tradition: breaking the law, killing Father Time

	XX The Place of Speculation in Art History
	Speculation in Cubism studies, would you speculate on Hitler’s motives? why Picasso’s?  There is a place for speculation, but one must be very careful.  Philosophy can be mixed into art history, it’s called the philosophy of art or aesthetics, you can speculate on the philosophical implications of a work of art, but you cannot absolutely cannot speculate on historical facts, historical facts are by far many, they are a minute set of occurrences which should not be speculated on, history is not a place for speculation, you need to have a rigorous method of slowly establishing a framework to the period you are studying, institutions, disciplines, practises, discourses, and you can write individual biographies compiled from notes, from journals, from critical essays of the time, slowly but surely you can build a picture of the 1910s, but beware of pop causality, this is not the rightful use of speculation in art history, art history if it is to speculate, requires speculation on the order of implications, aesthetic problems that are indubitable, that when you look at a painting, the painting brings up these problems no matter what, whether it is seen in 1914 or in 2002, the physical material, the configuration, structure, just HAS these problems within it… now the reasons why an artist chose these themes, chose these materials, you can’t speculate on that, you look like an idiot when you do that.  I understand that in art history today people want to make discoveries about Picasso because once you make a significant discovery, everyone after you must quote your name when using this discovery, but you’re wasting your time, you’ll be famous in the discourse of Cubism, but you’re not doing justice to the object of study, you’re making a mockery of art history, it becomes a sort of circus or competition, when in fact it should be something all art historians work together to form, a discourse that becomes more rigorous and more structured over time, and which keeps growing to allow new possibilities.  You can speculate on the very practise of art history, on your methods, and you can put forth possible theories for Picasso’s choice of a certain instrument, but you can’t speculate on a human life, on the reasons that a human being does what he or she does, because humans are irregular, they are not rigorous, they are contradictory, they do things at times for no reason at all.
	You can’t accept something as true just because seminal theorists have incorporated something as true in their work.  I don’t care if Mark Antliff and Patricia Leighten say that Picasso ate mangoes, that doesn’t make it so.  As someone preparing a doctoral dissertation, you need to not try to come up with discoveries.  Your discoveries right now should be about the practise of art history, about methods, about themes and why we choose them.  Speculate on why you have no balls instead of on why Picasso did this or that.  It doesn’t help the public understand his art if you speculate.  You’re misleading the public and you have a duty NOT to do that.  
	XXI Cubism and Ideology:
	In a large part, Cubism from its inception into the social fabric as concept and movement, as a group or various groups, can be seen to have been a matter of appropriation.  When an art movement gains self-awareness so early in its development, in hindsight one is led to wonder if it is even possible to have such clear insight into what we are doing in the present.  This is just a question , but can artists truly know what they are doing?  It may seem obvious that artists do know exactly what they are doing, but can anyone, artists, historians, or theorists, truly have a comprehensive understanding of their historical conditions or position?  One is entirely tempted to say yes.  Yes, I for one have a clear sense of my time.
	What one knows about one’s time, what one thinks one knows, is it something he or she experienced or did they read it in a book, or was it something they were told by politicians?  I feel the need to state that I am being openly speculative.  I am trying not to take anything for granted.  I, myself, feel I have a good grasp of the historical situation of the present, but how many times have I had a clear sense of things and have had it changed completely by some event of series of events?
	I said that Cubism can be seen to have been a matter of appropriation.  My first encounter with this possibility was the great range of statements that have been made on the subject of Cubism itself.  Over the last ninety years or so, nearing on a century, people of all shapes and sizes have written on Cubism, on its nature, its origin, its development, its philosophy or aesthetic.  The outcomes of these researches, however, are anything but consistent.  What does it mean when writers cannot agree to what an object of study is?  Does it mean that the object is none of these things, that it is all of these, or perhaps that the writers are not in fact writing about the object but merely using it for some other project?
	It may not seem obvious on the surface, but I believe that Cubism, over the last near-century, was the subject not of critique but of appropriation, appropriation in the sense of being purposely taken up in certain discourses not to shed any real light on its nature, philosophy, etc., but to serve purposes that the writer had in mind before Cubism, a project other than the elucidation of a movement in art.  It is common knowledge now that during the rise of Cubism in France, there was widespread contention over certain points, that throughout the development of Cubism there were arguments over 
	Oh, but what is ideology?  Ideology, I must admit, is not my speciality.  It is not something I have studied formally, it is only something I have felt, perceived in various writings which I have given the name of ideology.  I may be wrong in calling it this, perhaps it is something else that I am picking out.  This is mainly why I am taking this standpoint, in order to see what is shaping these texts on Cubism, what can be found to underlie the multiple projects over the years of writing about Cubism.  Who has written about Cubism and why? what did each writer have to gain or lose from the acceptance of or opposition to what they were setting out to say?  Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque seem to have been relatively quiet, especially in the first years, about what Cubism meant to them.  Could this be because they were busy making art, and that what Cubism was or wasn’t didn’t matter or wouldn’t change the fact that their project was the creation of works of art, of actual material objects, and not theoretical speculations?
	Art, in many ways, is rarely understood.  This means that with every created work of art, there can always be misunderstanding or even violent opposition.  But one does not oppose something merely for the sake of it.  When one finds oneself energetically combating a concept, event, or person, there is more involved than mere opinion.  I contend that ideology takes a part.  That one develops an aversion mainly on the fact that one’s ideology is being opposed, and ideological opposition is a kind of violence greater than any physical violence, it is a symbolic violence which can cut deeper than any physical blade.
	
	XXII	Cubism and Reflexivity
		…
	XXIII	So-called Analytic Cubism and The Unintelligibility of Modernism:
		…

	Find the ideologies behind certain texts on Cubism, find how it was used ideologically… try starting with Gleizes’ Cubisme et la tradition, which deals with French origins in the Gothic and Celtic versus the Italian Renaissance, etc.  

North-versus-Southism, Northism/Southism, 

Book Reviews:
Picasso and The Spanish Tradition edited by Jonathan Brown with contributions by Jonathan Brown, Susan Grace Galassi, Robert S. Lubar, Robert Rosenblum, and Gertje Utley
	1 Picasso and the Spanish Tradition of Painting
Jonathan Brown
	2 Narrating the Nation: Picasso and the Myth of El Greco
Robert S. Lubar
p.31, “It is my contention that Picasso denies rather than confirms a stable aesthetic discourse of cultural nationalism in fin-de-siècle French and Spanish art.  Locating the Demoiselles within a wider field of cultural criticism, I want to suggest that Picasso does not merely compete with his predecessors formally, but calls into question historical and temporal constructions of national visual traditions through a practise that is also textual.  The bodies of the five demoiselles constitute the site where this practise is negotiated.  As Picasso elides and overlays signifiers of cultural tradition in French and Spanish art, national history is not so much written, but unwritten, pulled apart.  Picasso’s “ladies” inhabit the space where multiple and contradictory texts converge.”
	p.33, “If the Demoiselles d’Avignon has consistently thwarted efforts toward a unitary interpretation, it is because Picasso’s aesthetic operations de-center meaning.”
	He uses the terms discursive formation without at all mentioning Foucault.  Foucault did something special, he created fully influential concepts, the sort of thing that a colonialist would have dreamt of, and even better, he makes them obscure enough that you can’t use them without 200 pages of explanation.  The Whole of Foucault’s art is needed to explain any given Part.  In other words, there is no possibility of metonymy in Foucault.  In other words, there is no part, only a Whole.  And it is possible that part of the problem people have had in criticising Foucault is this very fact that you cannot even take a single word without carrying every other word with it in one long, necessary descriptive chain.
	Miquel Utrillo’s book Domenikos Theotokopulos “El Greco” [Barcelona, 1906], should try to find it someday.  I should also learn more about Utrillo.  I saw his paintings at the Museum of Fine Arts of Montreal a few years ago and fell in love with them.  They are some of the greatest paintings I have ever seen, and I was immediately influenced by them, by the dirty walls of the city houses.  [Quebec society has a tendency to alienate its Quebecois painters.  See if Borduas or Riopelle ever wrote or spoke about this]
	p.36, “Picasso’s layering of visual texts to construct a fractured historical narrative is evident in his life-long exploration of the practise of variation.  His quotations from several, often antithetical, traditions in a single work frequently involve an operation of displacement that resists fixed meanings.”
	a voluptuous black Venus, the colonial signifier of “savage,” unbridled sexuality
	p.37, “If the Parisian art market held out the promise of international public recognition, it exacted a tribute that threatened to displace Spanish artists from indigenous cultural practises or, conversely, insisted upon remaking what was perceived to be their “native” character.  Indeed, Picasso was immediately identified as a “Spanish” painter in Paris, and thus experienced first hand the process through which the market negotiates in national identity as a cultural commodity.”
	Over the last one hundred years, tradition has been carefully annihilated.  What is a painter to do without a tradition to belong to?  I sit in front of my canvases and I have no idea what subject to paint, I know not what treatments to use, and this in part due to the destruction of tradition.  Culture is necessary to human life and culture cannot exist for very long without tradition.  Tradition.  It has become a loaded word, it means for many patriarchy and fascism.  But what are you doing?  The new tradition has been to circumvent tradition, a great anti-tradition.  My suggestion is that we put aside our pride and pretentiousness and return to whatever point we can find in our traditions and continue from there.  Abstract art would have to be where tradition was lost, although it did create a new tradition, but without rules.  A tradition is a discourse.  Are we saying that we should no longer create discourses?  I feel it is the critic’s fault, for the critic has caught painters in a trap.  Stop your mangy gropings.  Let us keep our traditions.  Perhaps tradition is not necessary to other disciplines, but as a painter, I must attest to the fact that I need a tradition to guide me.
	“The Demoiselles d’Avignon and Dionysian Destruction,” Arts Magazine, October 1980, pp.94-101 / Ron Johnson
	Mark Rosenthal, “The Nietzschean Character of Picasso’s Early Development” Arts Magazine, October 1980, pp.87-91
	Onwards to Cultural renewal! please! we must!
	We cannot merely critique culture, we must create it, renew it!
	My greatest fear is that we will critique culture to the point of killing it, and never continue creating culture.  “The Invention of Tradition”, Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger, eds., Cambridge University Press, 1983) / The Theory of the Avant-Garde, Renato Poggioli, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1968 /
	p.59, “Using the El Greco myth as a critical point of entry to deconstruct the identity of the nation, I would argue that rather than affirming a stable discourse of artistic origins, Picasso’s practise calls into question the ideological and rhetorical structures through which national identities were constructed in fin-de-siècle Spain.  Acutely aware of his outsider status as an Andalusian in Barcelona and as a Spaniard in Paris, Picasso viewed artistic nationalism with a critical eye from a mobile perspective.  In juxtaposing traditional, modernist, and exotic signifiers in Les Demoiselles d’Avignon; in disrupting the temporal, rhetorical, and ideological constructions through which the discourse of nationalism was secured in French, Catalan, and Castilian art and art criticism, Picasso brought into focus the object of a true historical criticism—the writing of history.  For Picasso neither preserves nor destroys tradition in the bodies of his demoiselles.  He oversteps boundaries, overlays past on present, and, in the process, explodes cultural myths.  Writing in 1911, the Cubist critic Roger Allard located Picasso’s “violent personality… resolutely outside the French tradition.”  Had he extended his observations to Picasso’s critical interpolation of artistic tradition in Spain, he would have approached a fuller understanding of the ways in which Picasso inverted the body-politic of the nation as he wrote history in the present tense.”

	3 The Spanishness of Picasso’s Still Lifes
Robert Rosenblum
“the First World War’s devastating proof of the consequences of nationalism”
	Today we have a spectacular intellectual front, the Quiet Avant-Garde.  We have an Arrière-Avant-Garde.
	“From the spring of 1904, when, at the age of 22, he decided to settle in Paris for good, until 8 April 1973, when he died in Mougins, Picasso lived in France as a displaced Spaniard who would allude in countless ways to the culture that had initially nurtured him south of the Pyrenees.  As a child in Málaga and La Coruna and as an adolescent in Madrid and Barcelona, his formative experiences encompassed the height and breadth of the Iberian peninsula as well as a regional variety that extended from Andalusia, Galicia, and Catalonia to the Castilian capital itself.  Thereafter, the holiest Spanish trinity of great masters—El Greco, Velázquez, and Goya—constantly haunted his figural inventions, whether he dealt with the suicide of a Catalan friend, Carles Casagemas; the hallucinatory vision of a brothel parlor in Barcelona’s red-light district; the bombing of the Basque capital, Guernica; or the corpses photographed in a Nazi concentration camp.  And in the ostensibly less ambitious and less emotionally wrought territory of still lifes in two and three dimensions, Picasso, for some seventy years, would equally reveal, in a dazzling variety of overt and covert ways, his affinities to Spain.  Not only did he perpetuate pictorial traditions that the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century masters of Spanish still life, from Sánchez Cotán to Meléndez, had defined; but by willful choices of objects, words, and even colors, he could disclose, sometimes obviously, sometimes cryptically, his continuing allegiance to his Spanish birthright.  it is this question, the Spanish accent, both loud and subtle, of the master’s still lifes, that I hope to explore here.” [p.62-62, Picasso and the Spanish Tradition]

	4 Picasso and the French Post-war “Renaissance”: A Questioning of National Identity
Gertje Utley
…
	5 Picasso in the Studio of Velazquez
Susan Grace Galassi
This is an excellent essay, though I doubt the writers of this book need my approval for the work they do.  This essay by Susan Grace Galassi, however, stands out from the others in the book by its formal attributes.  
Overview of the Book:
Overall, this is a good book.  I had some problems with it, problems that may stem from it not being rigorous enough, although I can hardly expect people to conform to my inflated ideals about how art history is to be practised.  My biggest difficulty was in digesting sentences that state things about Picasso’s intentions or gives reasons for some of his actions.  This, to me, verges on pure speculation, which in art history requires specific conditions, such as announcing that you are speculating, instead of trying to pass it off as a discovery of some self-evident truth that you were so ingenious to figure out.
	
CUBISM AND CULTURE [WORLD OF ART]:
I just read this book over yesterday and today [09/08/02 8:21:40 PM].

Notes & Quotes:
June-September 1911 in criticism
Roger Allard, ‘On Certain Painters’ [‘Sur quelques peintres’, Les Marches du Sud-Ouest, Paris, June 1911, pp.57-64 / Michel Puy ‘The Salon des Indépendants’ [‘Les Indépendants’, Les Marges, Paris, July 1911, pp.27-30 / Jean Metzinger ‘Cubism and Tradition’ [‘Cubisme et Tradition’, Paris-Journal, 16 August 1911] / André Salmon ‘Pablo Picasso’ [Paris-Journal, 21 September 1911] / [try to find more written in this period]
The Section D’Or Exhibition: 9 October 1912 [a lot more was written in 1912]
Must get Appolinaire’s The Cubist Painters because the chapters go according to month [Chapter 2 - February 1912 / Chapter 3 - November 1911-April 1912 / etc.]
Fernand Léger, 1913 ‘The Origins of Painting and its Representational Value [‘Les Origines de la peinture et sa valeur représentative’, Montjoie! No.8, 29 May 1913; No.9-10, Paris, 14-29 June 1913 [I think 1913 had the most significant of the early criticism of Cubism] [1914 had a few, a doublet in 1917, 1919 had a small constellation, but I think after that it settles down to a wider period between publications until probably the 60s or without a doubt the 1990s.
1911 Salon Des Indépendants, Room 41 – 1911 Salon D’Automne, Room VIII [try to read Albert Gleizes’ ‘Souvenirs—le Cubisme 1908-1914’, Audin, Paris, 1957

* * *

[from ‘Documentary history of the concept of Cubism’]:
1 an intersubjective report on Cubism

“Paris in 1912 was the vortex of a thousand artistic energies that had been gathering force since 1890 or earlier.  Picasso and Braque had just carried Cubism into a new phase with their invention of collage.  Robert Delaunay, the French Cubist, and Frank Kupka, a transplanted Czech, were verging into Orphism, or total abstraction.  In Munich, another active center of modernism, the Russian Wassily Kandinsky was simultaneously following the same course; within the next two years, Suprematism and Rayonism would break out in Russia, Vorticism in England, and, by 1917, “De Stijl” in Holland—all generated by the Cubist-Futurist ferment whose center was Paris.”
	—p.29, ‘The World of Marcel Duchamp’, Calvin Tomkins [1966]

“Feeling that traditional painting was exhausted, they took each of the elements that comprise the vocabulary of painting—form, space, colour, and technique—and substituted for the traditional use of every one of them a new interpretation of their own.  In short Cubism was a completely new pictorial language, a completely new way of looking at the outside world, a clearly-defined aesthetic.  As such it has shaped the course of almost all twentieth-century painting.”
	—p.17, ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914’, John Golding [1959]

“The stories relating the history of the discovery of Cubism all seem to have an element of the apocryphal in them.  Each writer relating the story of the discovery tells a different version.  Some attribute the development of Cubism to an interest in African Negro Sculpture, some to the impact of the Cézanne Exhibits of 1905-1906, some trace the development of Cubism to the awakening interest in El Greco, others to Iberian sculpture.  Fabureau even gives a version attributing the invention of Cubism to a joking “portrait” modified by Max Jacob.  Yet again, the development of Cubism is traced to the effect of the somber Spanish landscape on Picasso during his trip to Spain in the fall of 1906.  In a way all these theories are wrong, yet they have an element of truth.”
	—p.43, ‘Cubist Aesthetic Theories’, Christopher Gray [1953]

“The new dynamic element in the theories of the Cubists had two main sources.  One is to be found in the development of metaphysics through Nietzsche and Bergson.  The other is to be found in Positivism, which sought to create a sound epistemological basis for modern science.  Though differing in many aspects, both sources had in common their rejection of the concept of a static and unchanging reality which had been at the basis of the transcendental idealism of the nineteenth century.”
	—p.65, ‘Cubist Aesthetic Theories’, Christopher Gray [1953]

 “Kant remains an outsider, despite important work on several areas in which he has been instrumental to art history and to artists.  Some examples of his reception are so obvious that they tend to slip from our consciousness.  As Albert Boime has noted, many of the earliest responses to Kant were to the first Critique, to its apparent claims that we do not have access to the noumenal and that our knowledge of the world rests on our own faculties (1990: 329).  Kant’s first Critique is also the source for the famous analytic/synthetic distinction used early in discussions of Cubism to distinguish both working methods and chronological developments (green).  In both cases, Kant’s terminology entered non-philosophical discourse, with artists, critics, and historians referring to the “thing-in-itself” and to “analytic” procedures in Cubist composition.”
—p.8, ‘The Subjects of Art history: Historical Objects in Contemporary Perspective’, Mark A. Cheetham, ‘Immanuel Kant and the Bo(a)rders of Art History’

 “Cubism was more than another artistic “ism”.  It was something much deeper.  Cubism was a vital force which found expression in music and literature as well as in the visual arts of painting and sculpture.  it embodied a whole new outlook on the world and reality—a new Weltanschauung, an attitude sometimes ill formulated, full of inconsistencies in logic, even at times unconscious, but nevertheless powerful in its effect on artistic creation.”
	—p.3, ‘Cubist Aesthetic Theories’, Christopher Gray [1953]

“By far the most important element in the construction of any aesthetic system is the definition of the field of art itself.  Actually, this basic definition cannot be stated without implying even more fundamental assumptions about the nature of reality, the phenomenal world, truth, and even morality.  In short, certain metaphysical assumptions lie behind any aesthetic system no matter how deeply concealed or violently disavowed.”
—p.4 [Cubist Aesthetic Theories', Christopher Gray [1953]

We are merely showing different types of historical statements.  A chronological statement could be “From the year 1907 to the year 1914, Cubism would have numerous manifestations in art and literature.”  Some say in these chronologies that Braque made the first cubist paintings (Golding 20).  Some say the name cubist comes from Louis Vauxcelles who called Braque’s paintings exhibited at the Salon des Indépendant ‘bizarreries cubiques’.  Some say it was Matisse on the jury of the Salon D’Automne in 1908 who said Braque’s works were composed of ‘petits cubes’ (Golding 20-21)

The spirit of Modernism is still alive today, and allegories play in ads on our television, but it’s the Salons we’re lacking in North America.  Apollinaire in a review of the Salon des Indépendants in 1910 said cubism was a ‘déroute de l’impressionisme’. (‘L’Intreansigeant’ 18 March 1910)

People are given the honorary title of ‘cubist’ after the cause, in reviews [revisionism in history].  It was a break from hellenic tradition, says Metzinger, October-November 1910 (in the literary review, ‘Pan’).  The Cubist group became a conscious group in 1910 (Golding 23).

It could be said that Picasso and Braque held the ugly reality of true cubism whereas the others were copyists of generic flavors.  It would be false to say this, but many art theorists come up with such purely conceptual/inventive understandings of cubism, whereas an art movement is subtle with an aesthetic, a metaphysic, and a dialectic which furnishes syntheses and analyses.  Some say it was Metzinger who was the true cubist.

Modernism took place on many planes, levels—1)the Aesthetic plane, the metaphysical plane, the plane of dialectic, the rational/mathematical plane—concepts: substance, depth, locality, motion, time, space, history, reason, ideas, vortex, machines, geography, matter/mind/memory—progression, regress—panchromatic pan-national disruption in the human psyche and experience itself—critique of criticality.

Catalogue of Facts and Ideas I:
In 1914 & 1915, two issues of ‘BLAST’ came out in London, edited by Wyndham Lewis.  Both vorticism and suprematism were both ‘influenced by Cubism and Futurism, by photography and by recent developments in engineering technology and architecture’ (p.107 ‘Concepts of Modern Art’)

‘Concepts of Modern Art’ p.108, “Blast contained (in Lewis’s manifestos) some of the most intelligent criticism of cubism and futurism ever written”

In October 1912, Hourcade wrote that, “Il n’y a pas d’école cubiste” (Golding 26)

There were many get-togethers in several different painter’s studios.  The Salon and the Studio: the social fabric of art movements, actual discourse, communication between artists, art critics, art buyers.  Juan Gris helped disseminate and define cubist ideas (Golding 29).

The Duchamp brothers brought a more scientific approach to cubist thought.

All these writings pointed to cubism as a form of realism.  Metzinger in 1910 introduced the idea that cubism dealt with multiple views.  This is an extremely important thing to remember, because nearly all texts on Cubism written involve the concept of multiple views of the object depicted.

Salmon late in 1912, wrote ‘La jeune peinture anécdotique du cubisme’.

Raynal’s ‘Qu’est-ce que le cubisme’ came out late in 1913 (p.32-33 ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914’, John Golding).

Hourcade was the first to relate cubist painting to Kantian aesthetics.

All cubist painters differ considerably in aesthetic approach and philosophy.  Discourse keeps (weaves) the cubists together.  Pure theory: speculative, contemplative [include Schopenhauer].

Concept of cubism in 1910, 1911, 1912, 1913 (use critical documents of the time to say what the current concept was at each stage of Cubism’s development).

Cubism was constantly metamorphosing from ‘bizarreries cubiques’ to multi-perspectival viewpoints.
Allard says cubism is… Apollinaire says cubism is… Gleizes, Metzinger say ? etc.  Publicity—Medium used, war: paint a multiperspective of cubism year by year—teach how an art movement is not one single style; and a style is always several unique examples of a particular outlook or style.

Apollinaire published ‘The Cubist Painters’ in 1913.

“Contemporary critics and writers (except those who acknowledged no relationship between the work of Picasso and Braque and that of the other figures of the movement), however, were almost unanimous in proclaiming Picasso as founder and leader of the movement.”
—p.20, ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914

CHRONOLOGY:
The savagery of two of the figures in Picasso’s ‘Demoiselles D’Avignon’ is a passionate product of 20th century expressionism (Golding 47).  The Demoiselles cannot be the first cubist painting, for Braque’s paintings were the ones called ‘bizarreries cubiques’.  So he is clearly the first.  But not quite clearly.

‘Le Bordel Philosophique’ was Demoiselles D’Avignon’s first name (Golding 50), which seems to situate the painting more in a critical sphere.  
—G. Coquiot “Cubistes, Futuristes, and Passéistes” p148
—An important series of Iberian reliefs from Osuna were put on show in the Louvre in the spring of 1906 (Golding 52)
—Picasso had two Iberian heads, stolen from the Louvre by Géry-Piéret and given to Apollinaire who sold them to Picasso in March 1907 (Golding 53).
—Janneau p.12 ‘L’Art Cubiste’ says Picasso came to know Negro culture in 1906 through Derain (Golding 56).  Gertrude Stein says of Picasso, ‘upon his return from Gosol he became acquainted with Matisse through whom he came to know African Sculpture’ (‘Picasso’ p.22) (Golding 55).
—One must write not a history of cubism but a history of the reception of cubist ideas.

Critical Players: Léon Werth, Michel Puy, Roger Allard,
Olivier-Hourcade, Jacques Rivière,
Mauric Raynal, Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler

The original intentions of cubism were meant to remain obscure.  ‘Du Cubisme’ by Gleizes and Metzinger is full of rhetoric.  New forms always seem monstrous to the innocent eye.

“In the first place Apollinaire and André Salmon, as journalists, began making propaganda to establish Picasso’s rightful role as the sole creator of Cubism (no mention of Braque)”

—We cannot even know what Cubism is, art must always remain mysterious and obscure
—Picasso didn’t reveal his secrets to anyone
Logic of art history
contrastive, polar, variability, systems of difference, gestural, indexical, imagal, iconic, (alphabet, flags, targets, (Jasper Johns
—Art history was founded by Wöllflin and Riegl on the principle that formal analysis of art was the key to its study.

“Arthur Eddy, an American critic who in 1914 produced the first book in English on Cubism, Cubists and Post-Impressionism, wrote that ‘the comparison that Picabia is fondest of making is that of absolute music’.”—p.36, ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914’, John Golding

Many cubist painters ended up denying they were cubists because their styles had forked from the original nature of cubism [Golding 36].  It is difficult to know who influenced who and exactly how much.  Cézanne is said to be a direct influence on Braque because Braque was working in the same analytical/planar field.  And whether Picasso or Braque started Cubism or the revolutionary way of looking at Cézanne, whether Matisse was not the one who studied Cézanne most closely, no one can know.  These are the barricades that we hit in art history in this age.  But as we have seen, statements of all assortments can be made.

“Apollinaire felt that he had achieved simultaneity in his ‘poèmes conversations, où le poète au centre de la vie enrégistre en quelque sort le lyrisme ambiant’.”--[Golding 38]

I have made extensive use of John Golding’s history and analysis of Cubism because he seems to have known about the inconsistencies concerning the roots and realities of Cubism.  Now I would like to pass to the next part of our documentary.
————	————	————	————	————	————
“Superimposition of compositions: "Beginning in summer 1911, Picasso seems to have reworked certain canvases, not by modifying individual elements, but by superimposing an entirely new composition on the existing painting.  The new composition would not necessarily eliminate all traces of the old; rather, elements of old and new would intermingle on the surface of the canvas - cf. Le poète [OPP.11:02] [K:91A] ... The practice of superimposing different details and even compositions in the same picture allowed Picasso to combine Salon refinement with Impressionist spontaneity, reworking his canvases at length but leaving the revisions and additions visible as a series of reactions to a motif. In effect, the visible superimpositions of the picture recorded the process of its own creation ... By spring 1912, Picasso had arrived at a new form of superimposition; rather than combining different figurations of the same motif, he now layered seemingly unrelated motifs and inscriptions within the same canvas.”
—Enrique Mallen, http://www.tamu.edu/mocl/picasso/tour/t11.html

Already we can see another way to treat Picasso’s paintings in the period of early Cubist expansion.  Superimposition, or montage, could be said to be what Cubism was doing with the exposition of various viewpoints of an object cinematographically onto the two-dimensional plane of the painting, treating each aspect serially.  As you can understand, part of the new way of writing art-historically is to give a fresh voice to old art-historical facts, putting new spins on old words, reviewing the lexicon, revamping it for a original vibrancy.  You also have to meet your viewer halfway, so we suggest you just say to the reader: “These are the new ideas that I have found in art history.  Use them as you see fit, as you please.”

Earlier we had spoken about Picasso’s exposure to Iberian sculpture, how he actually owned for some time two Iberian heads.  It is a clever tool, if you think about it.  Linking Picasso to Iberian sculpture, for instance, can give him the mythical power he needs to lead an art movement.  Picasso-becoming-Legend is an important and often overlooked historical fact at the beginning of Cubism.  Watch for it in the texts.

“Picasso had become acclimatized to the French context and had rediscovered his Iberian attachments ... His earlier interest in light, mood, and expressive metaphor had brought about certain advances in plasticity and structure, but now an architectural solidity became the primary aim, and in its three-dimensionality the link to Cézanne was solidly forged and the approach to Cubism delineated.  In his still-lifes, Cézanne had introduced structural devices which Picasso and Braque were to develop radically. Often Cézanne would maximize the volume of an object, an apple, or bottle, by viewing it from an unexpected angle, out of normal perspective, or would uplift a table-top so that it no longer showed as a receding three-dimensional object but as a massive frontal plane ... Cézannesque massiveness of the 1906 figures ... helped Picasso to grasp the architectural principle linking ancient Iberian Osuna sculpture and Cézanne's painting ... [In] Nu sur le fond rouge [OPP.06:23] ... the construction of forms and proportions produce a sense of great volume and monumentality and a formal presence ... All the relative proportions have been radically altered in favour of a concerted power.”
—http://www.tamu.edu/mocl/picasso/tour/t07.html

What were the exact advances made in plasticity and structure?  What exactly is the aim of architectural solidity?  Stretching the limits of the medium.  Grouping together constellations : Thesis is: truth is ugly, novelty is repulsive, anything that breaks from tradition is discordant.

Looking for an underlying force or spirit in history is a form of synchrony.  Chronology is a diachrony.  

Cubists were doing research.  Let us slide
into a picture-show of writings on Cubism.

“The syntax and semantics of painting: "[Flam:] ‘The paintings of Picasso and Braque in 1911 ... are works in which some sort of syntax, however we’re going to define it, obviously is exerting a very strong pressure upon the semantic content of the picture. I think, for these works, the model is useful, if one does not over-systematize it an assume that the painting is indeed a text, which it is not ... There is a certain element, not of cognitive psychology, but of cognition, required of the viewer to work with this syntactical system ... One is not necessarily going to apply the same semiotic model to all painting. [But] so-called 'Analytic Cubism' seems to beg for that kind of analysis.’” (Rubin 1992, 216)
—http://www.tamu.edu/mocl/picasso/tour/t11.html

"Picasso liked to have money, there is no doubt about that, and he liked to keep it; but what sets him apart from most men in this respect is the fact that getting it did not fill him with elation. He found the whole business exhausting, particularly if it was accompanied by bargaining; but much more that that, he hated parting with his pictures. This was one of the very few things that stopped him working: the deep depression would not lift for . He loved his pictures, and he loved painting the, - could not conceive painting without love." (O'Brian 1994, 143-144) 

        “He stuffed the bank notes paid to him in a wallet until it became so crammed he did not dare leave it at home, but carried it about on his person in an inner pocket secured with a safety-pin. But affluence was bought at a price: he loathed parting with his own pictures. ‘Picasso was always distraught at having to sell his paintings,’ reports Fernande.” (Vallentin 1963, 81)

“A style of painting and sculpture, originating in the works of Picasso and Braque in about 1907. It started as an intellectual investigation of how a solid form can be represented in two dimensions without resorting to illusionism. Volume was generally suggested by the fusion of multiple viewpoints of an object in one image, which was presented as a complex of geometrical shapes. The subject matter of early cubism was invariably everyday objects of simple form, such as vases, tables, books, pipes, fruit, and musical instruments, many being suggested by the work of a forerunner of cubism, Cézanne. Figures, which are rare, often resemble primitive sculpture, the observation of which helped Picasso to break with Western tradition. After 1911 the development of cubism, in which Juan Gris now also participated, led to the introduction of collage and also to a more decorative approach, monochrome tones being replaced by rich colours. Cubism was the principal catalytic influence on the evolution of abstract art.”
—http://www.xrefer.com/entry.jsp?xrefid=501413&secid=.-

“Cubism aimed to restructure representation through a redefinition of realism, to show the solid reality of objects and not merely their appearance.”

‘Overlapping and interlocking planes which respect the planimentric nature of the picture surface’
——————	——————	——————	——————	——————	——————
There we have it.  Cubism and art history stripped bare.  1907-1914, 1901-1927.  All the different plateaus of modernism.  As you locate a period, be it 10 years or 15 years, or 4 years, you are entering a discursive formation when the subject matter is the same.  Content links so many various discourses together.  Presently we have broken the discourse with a sectioned line.  

Cubism from its many sides, a multi-perspective of Cubism in early 20th century and later 20th century documents.  This is a cubist enterprise I find myself currently involved in.  Cubism has involved dozens of ‘takes’ on the issue of Cubism.  Some remain on point about Braque’s art, some on Picasso’s, some speak of Cézanne, some of Matisse, some are written by Apollinaire, some by Raynal, some by Allard, some by Arthur Eddy.  Cubism is and isn’t a school, is and isn’t a system.  That much we know.  It did and didn’t appear first in Picasso’s work, nor Braques.  No one in nearly a century has written a definitive text on Cubism because it is IMPOSSIBLE.  I cannot write a definitive text on Cubism, I can only show the different methodologies.  What I venture out to do is govern the discourse carefully to not breach too far into a ‘definition’, I try to keep it descriptive, possible interpretations of Cubism doctrine, but never absolutely certain about anything.  What I’m trying to get to is a discourse on Modernism.  I want to take the shapes of discourse on Cubism, the discursive formations [Foucault] centered on Cubism from 1907 to 2001, even some of my own inventions incorporated into a text that discusses possibilities in depicting Cubism, the art of depicting the real world of objects as it is conceived.  Who was it that first described Cubism as the art of the thing as-it-is-conceived?  It is not important who said what anymore.  The thing of utmost importance is that we venture to give new possibilities for the study and writing of art history.  We have a somewhat pragmatic approach.  There is partly a usefulness-question in effect.  is this new view of art history viable?  Can we see it as an evolution/genealogy of concepts?  This we *can* do.  This we can do.

Different countries at the turn of the 20th century were evolving pan-chromatically in a nomadic movement/event, in a trans-national development in the arts, evolution, progression/regression, disruption in the fibre of the European [Western] mind; Holland with De Stijl, Vorticism in England, Cubism in France, Futurism in Italy, Suprematism and Rayonnism in Russia, Expressionism and later Bauhaus in Germany; all countries on an idealistic mission to represent modern reality.  No shift such as this had been known in thought and art since the Renaissance.   It is important to remember the Renaissance and its structures to describe the location of the science of the 20th century.  

All texts I have read on Cubism say that Picasso and Braque began the art form.  Most texts link Cézanne into Cubism’s beginnings as a major influence.  I find it questionable whether Cézanne actually knew he was doing what we say he did with different planes.  I hate to be nihilistic, but it’s possible that he had a poor sense of perspective, that he was a bad painter.  Nevertheless, he began a pictorial discourse that Picasso and Braque would add to, one which moved away, whether for better or for worse, from Renaissance tradition.  It is important to know, however, that all movements in their own time break away from tradition, and that Cubism didn’t break away from tradition any more than Realism did in the mid-1800s.  

A work of art is always in a historical dialogue with works of the past and with its contemporary works.  A work, however, is not to be seen as coming directly afterwards what came before, for any single work can be in communication with any number of works from anywhere in the past.  For instance, I can make a work of art in the 21st century that is in communication directly with a work from the Renaissance.  It is commonly held that a Cubist work comes out of Fauvism or Impressionism historically, but I contend that a work of art is timeless and should not be shackled to any given period in history.  The work only suffers from such a shackling.  It is useful at times, though, to see a work in its historical context, to see what influenced it, what shaped it, what social forces urged the artist to create this particular work.  But on the whole a work should not be bound to periodization.  In this way a Cubist work can at the same time be an answer to primitive art and theories of perspective from the Renaissance in full synchronicity.

————	————	————	————	————	————
“The art of painting original arrangements composed of elements taken from conceived rather than perceived reality.”
—Guillaume Apollinaire, The Beginnings of Cubism, 1912.

“The term ‘Analytical Cubism’ was coined by Juan Gris, the young Spanish painter who was soon to become the junior member of the Cubist trio.  He used it to describe the paintings done by Picasso and Braque during the period beginning in the late autumn of 1909.”
—p.54, ‘The Art of Georges Braque’, Edwin Mullins

 “Emphasizing the intellectual approach, Hourcade was the first of the many writers to relate Cubist painting to Kantian aesthetics, and in one of his articles includes a quotation from Schopenhauer: ‘Le plus grand service que Kant ait rendu c’est la distinction entre le phénomène et la chose en soi; et il a montré qu’entre la chose et nous il y a toujours l’intelligence’. [‘The greatest service that Kant has rendered to us is the distinction between phenomena and the thing-in-itself; and he has shown that between the thing and us there is always intelligence’].”
—p.33, ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914’, John Golding

“But as the pictorial innovations of Picasso and Braque—the construction of a painting in terms of a linear grid or framework, the fusion of objects with their surroundings, the combination of several views of an object in a single image, and of abstract and representational elements in the same picture—began to influence a widening circle of artists, the style became distinguishable by virtue of these features.”
—p.27, ‘Cubism: a History and an Analysis 1907-1914’, John Golding

 “The Cubist style emphasized the flat, two-dimensional surface of the picture plane, rejecting the traditional techniques of perspective, foreshortening, modelling, and chiaroscuro and refuting time-honoured theories of art as the imitation of nature. Cubist painters were not bound to copying form, texture, colour, and space; instead, they presented a new reality in paintings that depicted radically fragmented objects, whose several sides were seen simultaneously.”—Nicolas Pioch, ‘http://www.ibiblio.org/wm/paint/glo/cubism/’

MISCONCEPTIONS:
“Cubism is the most influential movement in the history of modern art.  It is a complex movement, including not only painters and sculptors, but also musicians and poets. The Cubists introduced entirely new approaches to interpreting form and space. Cubism began in France, where it flourished as a movement between 1907 and 1914. It was headed by the work of Pablo Picasso and Georges Braque.”
—http://cghs.dade.k12.fl.us/african-american/twentieth_century/cubism.htm

1)Who are the cubist musicians?
2)Are you sure it wasn’t the cubists who fed off the ideas of others who introduced new approaches to interpreting form and space, such as Riemann, Gauss, or Einstein?

“Characteristics of the first phase of Cubism, usually called Analytic Cubism, were the simplification, distortion and emphasis of the forms of objects. Cubism was a reaction again set the formlessness of Impressionism, but the development of Cubism got many ideas from post-Impressionism.”

1)What exactly is the simplification, distortion, and emphasis of the forms of objects?
2)Which ideas did cubists get from post-Impressionism?

“The role of the artist was to create symbolic forms for the essence of ideas, rather than initiate the short-lived appearance of things.”

1)What symbolic forms did cubists create for the essence of ideas?
2)What does the ‘short-lived appearance of things’ mean?  Weren’t the cubists in some way showing the ephemerality of things?

“A typical Cubist painting analyzes the subject in basic geometric shapes and elementary signs.”

1)Are you sure that the typical cubist painting analyzes the subject in basic geometric shapes and elementary signs?

I have found several sources that say that Picasso was inspired by Iberian sculpture.  Inspiration is difficult in such a way that we can never know where we learned about such and such a thing, such as Iberian sculpture, or the theory of relativity.

“Baudelaire led the attack on realists—those “parasites of the object”—who kept looking outside for what “was only to be found within.”  he hated Daguerre for photography and art are not the same thing, as he spent his life pointing out.  If art is the enemy of photography, Nature is only an “excitant”, a dictionary for use of the Imagination, which must “digest and transform””
—p.125, ‘Rococo to Cubism in Art and Literature’, Wylie Sypher

“In the same way Picasso took the painter’s task as recording une impression multidimensionalle.  Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler says that the main interest of cubists was to state in two dimensions what seems to have three—a form of polyphonic vision counterpointing the many facets of objects into a whole.  Therefore, Kahnweiler insists, cubist painting is close to the new music of Satie and Schoenberg, which is horizontal in melody and vertical in harmony.”
	—p.268, ‘Rococo to Cubism in Art and Literature’, Wylie Sypher

“In essence, though, Cubism was not to be an art of landscape, neither Braque nor Picasso was ever to be concerned primarily with landscape hereafter.  During 1908 both men approached Cubism chiefly through landscape, and this was natural enough since landscape had been Cézanne’s principal interest (handed to him by Corot and by the Impressionists) and in the early stages of Cubism it was Cézanne who was their guide.  But once the grammar of Cubism had been established in 1908—Braque working at L’Estaque in the south and Picasso at Créteil in the north—it grew increasingly obvious to both painters that the more natural development of this new pictorial language lay in treating themes which were close at hand and could be physically observed from all sides without a journey of fifty miles to do so.”
	—p.37, ‘the Art of Georges Braque’, Edwin Mullins

I am understanding a thing that is so real it is spinning in my universe.  Cubism is real.  It is a reality that can only be known by the real knowing.  All you can know is there for you and I to know.  The real knowing is just simple knowing.  Anyone can know and it may be those who do not seek to know who know best.  They just ride the train and know what there is to know.  But those of us who seek to know are on a fallible mission.  

I now see Cubism coming into being in several sittings.  From 1907-1910 we could say we have the actual birth of cubism.  In 1911, we have several theories coming into being, reactions to the works, public acceptance of the ideas portrayed in the actual paintings.  By 1913 and 1914, we have a more critical phase, and upwards until 1919, 1920-22, we have a fully synthesized cubism with all sorts of writings about cubism from all corners of the globe.  The first moments were the most critical, however.  1906 had the fabric of cubism and gave several hints.  1907 was the genesis of cubist theory by the hands of Picasso.  Braque had important works in 1908, 1909.  Each new year cubism took a new turn.  By the 1920s, almost all the sides of cubism had been practised and written about.  

Some of the first writings in English on Cubism might have been Clive Bell’s from the Bloomsbury Group, or perhaps it was Wyndham Lewis in BLAST who critiqued Cubism.  The actual first book in English on Cubism was by Arthur Eddy, an American critic in 1914 with the book Cubists and Post-Impressionism (Golding 36)].

 “A good critic may be able to make me see in a picture that had left me cold things that I had overlooked, till at last, receiving the aesthetic emotion, I recognise it as a work of art. To be continually pointing out those parts, the sum, or rather the combination, of which unite to produce significant form, is the function of criticism. But it is useless for a critic to tell me that something is a work of art; he must make me feel it for myself. This he can do only by making me see; he must get at my emotions through my eyes. Unless he can make me see something that moves me, he cannot force my emotions. I have no right to consider anything a work of art to which I cannot react emotionally; and I have no right to look for the essential quality in anything that I have not felt to be a work of art. The critic can affect my aesthetic theories only by affecting my aesthetic experience. All systems of aesthetics must be based on personal experience - that is to say, they must be subjective.”
	—p. ? ‘Art’, Clive Bell [1914]

“On the other hand, with those who judge it more exact to call these combinations and arrangements of form that provoke our aesthetic emotions, not "significant form," but "significant relations of form," and then try to make the best of two worlds, the aesthetic and the metaphysical, by calling these relations "rhythm," I have no quarrel whatever. Having made it clear that by "significant form" I mean arrangements and combinations that move us in a particular way, I willingly join hands with those who prefer to give a different name to the same thing.”
	—‘Art’ by Clive Bell [1914]

“Great art remains stable and unobscure because the feelings that it awakens are independent of time and place, because its kingdom is not of this world. To those who have and hold a sense of the significance of form what does it matter whether the forms that move them were created in Paris the day before yesterday or in Babylon fifty centuries ago? The forms of art are inexhaustible; but all lead by the same road of aesthetic emotion to the same world of aesthetic ecstasy.”
	—‘Art’ by Clive Bell [1914]

 “Like Futurism and Rayonnism the Vorticists were inspired by the pace of modern life and sought to capture the dynamic state of urban, industrial and technological progress.”
	— http://users.senet.com.au/~dsmith/vorticism.htm

 “One of the most daring, and most telling, of Stieglitz’s early ventures was his sponsorship of Gertrude Stein.  Stieglitz had come to know her in 1909 on a summer trip to Paris, where he had gone to survey the new developments in painting at first hand.  He spent many evenings at 27 Rue de Fleurus and a few years later, in 1912, he brought out a special issue of Camera Work devoted entirely to two “essays” by Gertrude Stein, one on Matisse and one on Picasso.  To supplement these short pieces Stieglitz included fourteen full-page reproductions of “representative paintings and sculptures” by the artists subjected to Gertrudew Stein’s unusual scrutiny.”
—p.12-13, ‘Cubism, Stieglitz, and the Early Poetry of William Carlos Williams’, Bram Dijkstra

***
	We have seen the root of the name of Cubism, of the birth of Analytical Cubism, but our focus was not on Synthetic Cubism.  This form comes along in the early 1910s, 1912 and 1913, as far as I know, and then it really crystallizes after World War I, into the purest Synthetic Cubism
	Edwin Mullins, in ‘The Art of Georges Braque’, says: “In the magazine Der Sturm of February 1913, he [Guillaume Apollinaire] wrote ‘Picasso and Braque incorporated in some of their pictures letters from labels and other printed matter, because label, notice and advertisement play a very important aesthetic role in the modern city and are well-suited for incorporation into works of art.’” [p.72]
	We have a style burgeoning into a truly fruitful ordeal.  The painting as object was increasingly critical to the metaphysic of Synthetic Cubism.  It is a new realism, it is a science.  Synthetic Cubism Descaralizes the object, makes it a simple material construction, texture, tonality, aim, and aesthetic value.  It is a mending of fact and fiction, playing on the Cubist line between them.  In Synthetic Cubism the idea was to create a possible object more real than an actual object.  It is leaning towards a sort of Historical Truth than to objects simply.
	Innovating ideas sometimes yield a destabilizing spirit, destabilizing historical time, materials of temporality in equivalencies of bulk weight space twisted in complex gravity into Objective Expressionism of color, Synthetism, Perspectivism, Precisionism, and Purism, all clearly outlined by the reign of Synthetic Cubism.  Some say the concepts of space and time in Cubism from from Rienmann, Gauss, Einstein.
	Historical materialism here yields us the different documentary perspectives on cubism, the various narratives, the narrative structures, misconceptions of criticism of cubism, the sources of current narratives and concepts on/of literary and pictorial cubism, ‘the move from Renaissance perspective to Cubist perspective’, ‘the use of multiple perspectives’.  But we won’t go into Synthetic Cubism really any more than we already have.  The importance in this essay was the beginning of Cubism, only a short period, 1906-1913, right up to the point before we enter the game of Synthetic Cubism.

“At its extreme purity—in Braque’s painting—cubism is a study of the very techniques of representation—painting about the methods of painting, a report on the reality of art.  With Braque’s intelligent and lyrical vision cubism devoted itself to what the French call the tableau-tableau—the painter’s painting—which investigates both the object and the means of painting this object.  As a tableau-tableau cubism reaches its most refined introspections, its most acute self-consciousness.  Yet cubism was not at first doctrinaire; its relation to the world was too genuine.  Braque’s painting is a formal but not, however, an abstract world, since he never loses contact with the texture of objects he studies and destroys, the bottles, violins, fruits, and musical scores he fixes in the “luminous silent stasis” which James Joyce believed is the artistic triumph.”—p.269, ‘Rococo to Cubism in Art and Literature’, Wylie Sypher [1960]

“To have art approach music was the aim of the symbolists.  But the symbolist distance from actuality is not the cubist distance.”—p.305, ‘Rococo to Cubism’, Wylie Sypher

Picasso and Braque’s work throughout is not scientific, it is intuitive [Golding 77].  Picasso and Braque painted objects that they had laying around them in their studios [Golding 88], which, to me, links them to a form of historical materialism.  Even more historical materialist is their use of actual everyday objects in their collages.  They were taking objects, materials, from their environment, their own personal histories.

“In a vein of intimacy the cubists introduced into their compositions the names of popular songs, the programmes of theatres they had visited, the packets of cigarettes they had smoked, or the headings of newspapers they read—…” [Golding 89]

Cubism is a form of reportage, a form of documentation of events that were transpiring around the artists.

————	————	————	————	————	————
“To frame is to create a site - at once a physical locus and a metaphysical locale - for the work of art, and thereby to establish a specific context in which it is to be experienced.”—p.153, ‘the Rhetoric of the Frame’, edited by Paul Duro [in an article by Deepak Ananth]

I quoted this sentence because what we have been trying to do is frame cubism, lock it into a position to study it, to measure it, to pierce through its species and genera of thought.  We found the frame in continuous quoting of historical documents, books on and around cubism.

Where is cubism situated metaphysically?  Well, we can be between fact and fiction on and about cubism.  We can be in the analytical phase or the synthetic.  We could be writing principles.  We might think up aesthetic theories on cubism, as we have seen in one of the books read for this project.

The dialectic of mind and object.  Subjective/objective polarity.  Read and write.  Light and dark.  Figure and ground.  Three-dimensionality, two-dimensionality.  Paper/canvas, brush/comb, medium/texture, space/time.  Cubism sure does belong to the metaphysic of time and space, all the formalities of each sphere.

But to ‘frame’ cubism is also to confine it, and as a movement, cubism is better left to breathe fully through space and time, not to confine it to one specific perspective.  Cubism was the very act of perspective as it changes through different positions in time and space.  Cubism, then, in its focus on perspective, is philosophical, for philosophy, or Metaphysics, IS the study of the concepts of time and space and how humans react to them, or use them in their reasoning.

What we saw in this essay was how when one tries to hard to theorize on cubism, one ends up inventing a history that isn’t necessarily the true one.  The only real context in which cubism can be experienced is 1907-1914 Europe.  In North America 2001, I’ve only been able to find different narratives and juxtapose them to see cubism from all sides.  

What happened since the early 1900s can be called the movement of history, or the transmogrification of history.  Some say history is the expression of the full dynamics of human suffering.  We can no longer believe what we hear about Cubism because so many misconceptions about its true fact and value have been propagated around the globe for almost a hundred years.  History is still vivacious with creativity.

And so historical facts remain, in the end, hidden to the historiographer.  Historical writing cannot fully encapsulate material existence, but it can come close; historians can, in their writings, use other historical documents and reconstruct aspects of the reality that transpired, but this is dangerous, and tends to lead to misconceptions.  Therefore the historian must be a dialectician: he or she must be very familiar with the discourse in which the period they are studying lies.  Once one becomes familiar with the discourse of ones study, then the rest seems to shape itself out, everything falls into place and an historical account is possible.

This, then, is the end of our discourse on Cubism where we learned how difficult it was to navigate through the annals of historiography, and the difficulty of making a decision on what is historical fact and what is nothing but mere invention.  We hope that Cubism is now somewhat clear; for from Cubism we shall now move through historical materialism, surrealism, and the pure subject matter of art history.

A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved. Citations are Fair Use.
