Cubism:
03/23/01 12:02:28 AM
***
	Preface:
	…
	I
	Cubism has to be understood as a style and a perspective.  Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso thought it up in the basement.  Truth is, it came from a long line of creators.  Picasso is known for his cave-man style, Braque as a tragi-comedian.
	Cubism has been applied as a term to designate the leaning of artists from Cézanne to Gertrude Stein, to William Carlos Williams and André Gide [Picasso, Braque].  The importance is the perspective.  Analytical Cubism precedes Synthetic Cubism, the two main schools of Cubist thought.
	By breaking it down to Analytical and Synthetic Cubism, Style, and Perspective, we shall attain our goal of understanding Cubism.

	This project started a long time ago when I was trying to understand what Cubism was about.  I didn’t know how to approach it, every trace was a dead end in my empirical methodology.  It wasn’t until I applied Einstein’s theory of relativity to Cubism that I uncovered one of its truths.


“Even though classical mechanics does not supply us with a sufficiently broad basis for the theoretical presentation of all physical phenomena, still we must grant it a considerable measure of ‘truth,’ since it supplies us with the actual motions of the heavenly bodies with a delicacy of detail little short of wonderful. The principle of relativity must therefore apply with great accuracy in the domain of mechanics.”
—Albert Einstein, Relativity: The Special and General Theory, 1920.

	How can this bit of information be used to understand Cubism?  The quote has been used to bring up the word mechanics because Cubism deals with a metaphysic, an aesthetic, and mechanics.  Cubism, in the end, will be understood in the relative terms of Analytical, Synthetic, Style, Perspective, Metaphysic, Aesthetic, and Mechanics.  These will be the operative terms of the essay which is a dialectical reasoning of Cubism in my mind, my aesthetical vision of Cubism, of brown paper books and philosophy, of Time.

	II
	Style:
		a)Aesthetic
	Analytical Cubism tends towards browns and greys, dry colors, aged colors, stains, midnight cafés in Paris.  Synthetic Cubism was almost Abstract Expressionist in color.  The color schemes of both tell a lot about the aesthetic experience of both.  With Analytical Cubism, Braque and Picasso didn’t feel the need to go very far in color.  Or they WERE going very far but with an unknown message in mind.  What are they saying?  They are saying “We’re bored!” or “Homo, man, humus, earth.”  The earth, what a way to begin a new style.  To find Analytical Cubism, go to a highway that was dynamited.  Look at the rock forms, look at the natural structures.  This is the beginning of Cubism.  It gets a little more entwined as we go on.
	The experience warps the eyes, the senses.  What we have is a new perspective.

	Perspective:
a)Metaphysic:
	One could say that Cubism’s monochromaticism is mystical.  One could also say that Braque and Picasso when they worked together obsessively feeding off each other were delving into the occultist side of creation.  One could also say that they were dry, cerebral instead of spiritual, but in either case the idea pervades.  What I mean is that their focus on the thought of the object, the distorting of the object, the translation or displacement of the object, in its surgical accuracy and precision, was on the border between a science and a religion.  The practical application of pure knowledge.
Mechanics:
Cubism is the omnisynthesis of forms.  In its process, in the functional aspect of its aesthetic and metaphysic combined, Cubism, the style and perspective, hovers with a specific mechanical wiring, a formulaic methodology that always creates adequate results.  As a science, one of the gears that sets it in motion is Variation.  Also one of the fragments left over from the Baroque era.

Style:
	b) the Dialectic of Braque and of Picasso:
A dialectic is a process of thinking by dialogue, discussion, debate, or argument.  Braque and Picasso.  There was plague in Spain in 1905—1906, Cholera in Russia in 1910.  We could say that events act in a dialogue and that they show a rational process.  Braque and Picasso in the early 20th century worked together so closely together that they imprinted themselves on each other, became one powerful force acting together one uniform impetus, energy, social thinking, craftsmen in their shops crafting utensils for the war of commodities.  Picasso and Braque created a vortex in the art world, a distortion that would stand to this day, whose Atmospherical noises we hear now vaguely in the back of our minds and cities.
Cubism is entirely musical.  Most of its subjects are musical-oriented.

Perspective:
	b)Journal: [notebook]
I just recently discovered that Gide’s Les Faux-Monnayeurs is a tableau-tableau, painting within the painting, frame within the frame, image within the image… and is Cubist…! I think I’ll put these journal entries in the textbook because they show me learning new things about Cubism, and that experience is priceless.  One can then know how to assail Cubism.  It is a matter of taste.

Important Dates: [coefficients of Russia]
1907
Kodac in June 1888 made cameras for the mass public.  This would be a tragic and silent revolution in world consciousness.  A bizarre anti-climax. [1907 to mid-1920s are important to the first life of cubism; cubism would appear afterwards up to the present in various forms.]
The 1920’s had a cubist film by Russian creator Dziga Vertov in ‘Man with a movie camera’.  This textbook style is to exalt the mechanical structures of Cubism.  We are using the cut-up technique, the splice, the photomontage.
1906 was an important year for the discovery of cave-man art.
“1906 is a key year.  It was then that Alcalde del Rio and Padre Sierra discovered the famous caves of El Castillo, Covalanas and La Haza, as well as other caves in Cantabria, which were then studied by Breuil; in the same year F. Regnault came across ancient Aurignacian figures in the cave of Gargas in the French Pyrenees and Molard discovered magnificent animal paintings in black in the ‘Salon Noir’ of the gigantic cave at Niaux, which shortly afterwards were examined by Breuil and Cartailhac.
[‘The Art of The Stone Age’ by Hans-Georg Bandi]

From the Beginning:
The concept of a cubist textbook is phenomenal.  It adheres to the metaphysical space of cubism which is mechanical.  In the motions of the artists, of events, the public is shook, art-tasters come in crowds to see the human spectacles, gods in humanoid form who hoard out works of finest art by the bundle.  A critical time in 20th Century styles were the years between 1905 to 1908.
Famous sentence: “Treat nature in terms of the cylinder, the sphere and the cone.”  The man this quote is attributed to is Paul Cézanne in 1907 in a correspondence with Émile Bernard.  I am going to attempt to make a list of themes from memory from what I once read on the internet: 1. Abstract; 2. Two-dimensionality of the canvases; 3. Multiple views; 4. Mixed perspectives; 5. Geometric forms; 6. Analytical; 7. Rational; 8. Monochromatic; 9. Sobriety; 10. Classical.

Cubism was a style and a perspective, had a mechanical twist much like the Futurists and an inlay of the Renaissance. I would say that the aesthetic of Cubism is that of the Mona Lisa.  Non-Euclidean geometry.  Anything an old radio can give on a Sunday.

In Baroque art, Arcimboldo make visages with vegetables, with meat, with fire, books, a gun.  They had paradoxical images, strange trickery of the eye, vague forms, shadows.  We can see Cubism as a modern-classical movement of pure reason in the Kantian sense [because Kant is important to Cubism, is basically the first cubist].  Cubism resembles the Baroque era, remember that.  Surrealism would also have classical elements in Dali, sculptures of Venus, Aphrodite.  Kurt Schwitters would make a flywheel by gluing diverse materials to cardboard, wood, and paper.

Multidimensionality:
For Ideas, we have Plato, Kant, and Cubism.  Plato says that objects have their respective Ideas in the realm of Ideas, which are permanent, absolute; the Idea precedes the physical object.  Kant’s ‘Critique of Reason’, a detailed biology of thought [says Will Durant], states that there exists knowledge independent of all sense experience.  Not all knowledge is derived from the senses.  Kant says the mind is an active organ which moulds and coordinates sensations into ideas, an organ which transforms the chaotic multiplicity of experience into the ordered unity of thought [Durant].  Plato gives us idea, law, and ideal.  We get to choose.  And what if we chose Cubism?  Cubism is an idea that art deserves more than a mere realistic portrayal of the object.  In fact, the more realistic is Cubism where we show the shape of the object in the mind.  We also see the three-dimensional object through Time, through the experience that the painter had with the object.  It is more personal, shows more of the process, the experience, the affinity between painter, canvas, brush, oils, models, still lifes.
This is where we must differentiate Cubism from other forms of art [styles, movements].  In doing so, we will have a short graspable history of modern art.  Modern art for us began in the Baroque period.  The reason is that art reached its summit in the 1700s.  It wouldn’t peak as high until Cubism.  Cubism and the Baroque should stand out from the other art movements.  We will now look at its historical context.
One could easily mistake vorticism for Cubism, some Abstract Expressionist works resemble Cubist opera.  Preceding Cubism by a couple of years is Futurism in Italy.  The Italians have a lot to say about art history because they helped form its biggest links [Renaissance].  Bauhaus is a school of architecture that opened in 1919, at the peak of Synthetic Cubism.  Analytical Cubism: 1909—1912.  Synthetic Cubism: 1912—1913 and 1917—1919.  It is important to name World War I: 1914—1919 [the dates are purposely changing to show that dates aren’t most important].
Abstract Expressionism is an emotional art.  It came after Cubism.  It seems time to mention an important fact about Analytical and Synthetic Cubism and why Kant was brought up.  In the Critique of Judgement, Kant has the Analytic of Aesthetic judgment and the Dialectic of Aesthetic judgement [a synthesis].  It seems that thought wants to progress from analytical to synthetic, deduction to induction.

III
Cubism then, is the object as-it-is-conceived [in the mind].  Analytical Cubism from 1907 to 1912 is more temporal than Synthetic Cubism [1912—1920s] which is more textural.  It is an artistic style, is a perspective.  Let us take the time to explain how Cubism existed in the early 20th century and how it has existed since the Baroque era, since Cro-Magnon man 20 000 years ago.  This is done as so.
If you have spent some time painting, you will recognize the patterns that take place on the canvas as oil paints mix together.  In the 21st century, we cannot stand next to a canvas without at least Cubism existing, if not Surrealism and the Baroque.  They exist in our minds, in the everyday experience of 21st century schizoid man.  This is an age that was oft-times prophecied.
We are perhaps then more Cubist today than ever.  Look at the internet, the internet is a Cubist cinema.  Text has new connotations nowadays.  The Book has changed.  It is permissible to say that the book at the same time as Cubism dealt with paintings, the book also changed.  André Gide published ‘The Counterfeiters’ in 1926, wrote ‘Les Caves du Vatican’ mostly in 1912.  His works give good insight into Cubism in its literary form.  Cubism has several icons involved in its ideology.  Here they are.
Cubism has the tableau-tableau icon.  It serves to represent Mirror Images, Reflections, Fractal geometry.  Thereby whenever we stand next to an easel and canvas, with brush in hand we resemble the thing we are painting, we and the painting are one, reflected in the still ether, crystallized and sent back into the chamber of permutation that is the exercise of the act of painting whereby the image is always changing one step at a time through various metamorphoses ends up a finished product, a commodity.  These numerous steps can be delineated as the different schools of thought in art, the many movements.
A painting becomes Surrealist when ambiguous figures are employed to the advantage of the painter.  Pure animal emotion in Abstract Expressionism resembles these ambiguous shapes.  I hereby declare that all concepts in art history take part when a new work of art is commenced.  It is undeniably true that the movements in art history affect the modern painter whether he is aware of not.

	Style:
a)Aesthetic
William S. Burroughs created an aesthetic almost synonymous with that of Cubism.  Cubism has some dark works, some very dry tones, dark dry tones, and wood was commonly imitated in the Synthetic cubist phase.  About William S. Burroughs we shall say a few things.  Firstly, he created the cut-up novel.  His cut-up technique was impeccable and with it he wrote over a dozen novels, though they aren’t all complete cut-ups like ‘The Ticket That Exploded’ or ‘Nova Express’, respectively 1962 and 1964.
William Burroughs was also a painter and recorded sound poetry, narratives, an all-purpose bedtime story.  How he fits into cubism is that he PROVES that cubism can exist outside its natural timeline of 1907 to the mid-1920s.  Braque was to paint well into the 1950s and early 1960s.  Picasso would do the same.  This means that the aesthetic exists outside the natural existence of a movement, or CAN do so.  The aesthetic experience had one major change in cubism, from analytical to synthetic methods.  The method of production would create an experience differing to the old school of analytical cubism.  It would be more textural than temporal, we have said, analytical cubism uses multiple views and mixed perspectives, synthetic is more basic, is a few gentle shapes piled atop each other as the photomontage and creates a primitive language that erects the idea of the mandolin or so that the artist is portraying.  The cubist painter became an artist in Synthetic Cubism.  They would change the art world forever.  Today we have a saturation of the market, art is impossible for up and coming newcomers.  The myth of Picasso still drives amateurs on, however.  That myth is where the aesthetic of cubism exists, as a primal shape in our being’s code, a process of analysis that happens, moments of heightened awareness where the shapes of our thoughts become apparent.  Phenomenology is Cubism in the philosophical plane.  The phenomenon of the object is what cubism deals with.  The object conceived in the mind.  Existence.

Perspective:
a)Metaphysic:
The Bauhaus school in Gropius and Suprematism in Malevich are concerned with basic shapes, the square, the line, etc.  These form the concepts of cubism, the object is a concept, has an internal language.  We are dealing with the semiotics of cubism.  The use of the camera as a hobby for millions creates a sense of power over memory.  It builds the ego and allows us to comprehend things such as cubism.  The camera is then a tool to understand cubism.  Look through the peephole, crank it, take a snapshot of the object, take another picture from the other side, from beneath, from the top.  Develop the pictures and glue them on a canvas.  You have performed an act of analytical cubism.  Photomontage is cubist and photomontage is generated repetition, is propaganda, variation, echo.  World War I and radio would affect the art world.
Mechanics:
The machines of war, the flashing by of billions of dollars in commodities.  What an upheaval! The key word is Variation.  William S. Burroughs in ‘What are you here for?’ on the album ‘Dead City Radio’ is full of variation almost sounding like a Gertrude Stein in her portrait of Picasso.  What could be more cubist than that?  Still more cubist is the eternal regression of the tableau-tableau, that is, is the mirror reflection off into infinity when you have two mirrors facing each other.  The canvas becomes a canvas of a canvas, ad infinitum.  The artist is deified, is the creator.  These are the basic rhythms of Cubism.

Style:
b) Themes
Musical instruments may be the theme most developed in Cubism.  The mandolin, the guitar, are the two themes that appear in both Analytical AND Synthetic Cubism.  The still life, basically.  Self-consciousness is another theme.  Analysis itself is the theme, the analysis that exists in the mind, analysis of the object.  Hegel speaks of Force holding the object together and then also separating the qualities.  The indeterminateness.  Picasso and Braque in analytical cubism showed motion, movement with arcs, oval shapes, with curves almost logarithmic on the canvas.  The greys browns blacks off-whites of Analytical Cubism and the jutting edges, the planes, the fabric, and the COLLAGES of Synthetic Cubism.

Perspective:
b)The Fugue of Picasso and Braque
Synthetic Cubism was the period of synthesis, the true period of Creation.  Analytical Cubism was the blueprint period of Cubism, the period of research, of Seeking, of the quest for an ideal.  The ideal came in pure colors and wood textures in the later period of Cubism.  Cubism hit us in two strains, Analytical and Synthetic, one concerned with dissection, subdivision, the other with concreteness of experience, with demonstration, with BUILDING THE OBJECT.
Picasso and Braque spent years and years together in the studio working out ideas, feeding off each other, creating a whirlpool of art around them, a vortex in the art world.  The world never saw such collaboration.  In the Baroque period, the idea of the canvas within the canvas made its first real apparition.  By true apparition we mean that the tableau-tableau was used with the knowledge that it is in fact a trick of the trade.  Cubism has musical structures, lines play a fugue on the page.  Synthetic cubism is more in blocks, it sends you the object in one block, one equation that your brain slowly digests.  Analytical cubism is more akin to small trembling waves on the water’s surface.  Clouds, natural shapes and machine shapes.  Cubism shows MOTION, MOVEMENT through TIME, mathematical, mechanical.

c)Journal [notebook]:
Cubism has this prestige, this upper-class phenomenology about it, surrounding it.  I’ve been studying it for quite a while now and this is the only way I saw fit to give a detailed description of Cubism.  I knew I would have to be repetitious.  I didn’t want to be redundant, though.  Here’s an important quote I must use from Husserl about pure phenomenology:

“We shall begin with the necessary correlation between object, truth, and cognition—using these words in their very broadest senses. To every object there correspond an ideally closed system of truths that are true of it and, on the other hand, an ideal system of possible cognitive processes by virtue of which the object and the truths about it would be given to any cognitive subject. Let us consider these processes. At the lowest cognitive level, they are processes of experiencing, or, to speak more generally, processes of intuiting that grasp the object in the original.”
—‘Pure Phenomenology, Its Method and Field of Investigation’, Edmund Husserl, 1917

	One thing was certain for this essay: I needed to be musical, or else it wouldn’t be an honest representation of Cubism.  We have seen Kant’s thoughts on cognition and how they work within the context [in apparition much later on historically] of cubism.  What we have with our idea of cubism is not a chronological time scale.  We have two stages of one process: mathematical ontology.  Objects and Subjects of existence and experience are rendered in a mathematical language [pictorial, graphic], in their full range of ontological contingency.  Cubism, however, much to its fault, is Subjectivist, shows only one reality.  Surely the objects of Picasso’s paintings might look different conceived in the mind of another being.  The cubist paintings aim at universality, a universality which we have stopped striving for.
	The simultaneity of various objective realities.  Photomontage.  Perhaps the cycle of Cubism exists outside time and communicates ages to other ages; cave-man and modern homo sapiens are one and create like existences.  On the emotional side, all painting experiences are alike.  The being sublimates his primal desires through the pigment or the brush.  In cubist painting we have important symbols that have different functions: Braque played once with a nail at the top-center of the canvas, a painted nail using the full illusion possible with the pictorial medium.  Idea and basic design: An outline of Cubism.
	It was once said that Georges Braque and Pablo Picasso were ‘like two mountaineers roped together’.  Braque would leave for the army.  The proper historical context for Cubism is the Idea, anywhere the idea is conceived, ideas about objects, concepts of the object, the thing; material.  Plasticity rose in the 19th century, became a true reality in the early 20th century.  Illusionism is strong in Cubism when it is performed.  We have the performed art of Cubism and the displayed form of Cubism.
	Cubism allows for multiple perspectives to exist on the flat plane of the canvas at once.  As you scan the painting, be it a nude or a still life, you catch various takes on how the object may have been seen by the painter.  The actual experience is lost but sublimated through the art, and appears on the canvas as a mathematical equation of the experience, the mood, the emotion of the time of the execution of the painting.  The metaphysic is one primal.  Primitiveness is a quality added to modern man making him the suitor of primordial ideals, religious, ritualistic, ecstatic [we mention Picasso’s ‘carnival’ paintings].  Cézanne would be one of its fathers, would dissect forest scenes into block-formations, basic design, each shape a symbol of itself, each execution a modality of the entirety of the project from conception to exhibition.  When paint is added, the motion of the arm is imprinted on the canvas.

The Cubists ‘challenged the age old sanctity and significance of the human image’.  Picasso was the machine breaking down and ‘rethinking form in terms of planes’; Braque ‘evaluated space and sorted it into pieces and elements’ [internet source].

“The manner in which the object is given within each of the single intuitions belonging to this continuous consciousness may vary constantly; for example, the object's sensuous "looks"—the way in which the object always "looks" different at each approach or remove and at every turning, from above or below, from left or right—may be forever new in the transition from one perception to continuously new perceptions. In spite of that, we have, in the way in which such series of perceptions with their changing sensuous images take their courses, intuitive consciousness not of a changing multiplicity but rather of one and the same object that is variously presented.”
—‘Pure Phenomenology, Its Method and Field of Investigation’, Edmund Husserl, 1917

	Erik Satie had three nocturnes in 1919.  From listening to them, be can apprehend the boldness of the cubists, the seriousness, the artist painting himself as a spectre, a ghost through jubilant motions in the art world, always the center of attraction, the coveted creator, and so on.  The Trois Nocturnes are an expression of the Synthetic Cubist Age: they are expressive.  Expression went up a rung on the ladder from Analytical Cubism to Synthetic Cubism.
	What else can be said about Cubism?  I discovered it at a young age, tried to understand it.  Understanding cubism leads to the creation of objects in your mind.  You will create the mandolin you are looking at in the cubist representation.  You sort of ‘download’ the object, the main script of it.  The rest is details and the details are added inside the imagination.  Cubism is a concept art, is the art of the concept.  We’ve seen Relativity and Phenomenology fit into it nicely.  It occurred at the beginning of the 20th century but would now exist whenever anyone looked back to anywhere on the timeline of art history.  You can’t look at Altamira, at any cave painting or engraving and NOT see Picasso’s ‘Guernica’.  Such are the facts, such is reality in this modern age.  We read National Geographic magazines from 1938 and see the truth behind Cubism that lived beyond World War I.  The aesthetic lives outside the art, lives on in other fields, pervades round through all the fields of art and science.

	IV
	Phenomenology of Cubism:
	Rock structures.  Nature.  There’s a lot of nature in Cubism.  They subtly wove it in.  They based it, the cubist thinkers, on new theories of relativity in physics, phenomenology in philosophy and also from writers like Marx and Freud.  Psychoanalysis helped forge the main pathways of Cubism.  The new outlook on the universe that sparked Einstein’s theory of relativity would give Cubism a new way of viewing the object, conceptually, as-it-is-conceived, and thus it would be natural, realistic, with the assumption that our minds actually experience objects in that way.  A leap had to be taken, the cubists needed to assume their own conception of the object as a universal.  And in many ways it was universal.  A closer look, however, will show that many artists worked around Cubism in different styles.  Many kept a more classical style throughout all the early 1900s.  Time is natural, the object in the dimension of Time also.

	The Icon: psychoanalysis and Cubism:
	Many images in the later Picasso works, the 1930s, the 1940s, portraits that is, are iconic; the person is portrayed as though it were a playing card, people appear to be stuck inside a 2-dimensional plane.  That 2-dimensional image comes from deep within our brains.  It is at the center of our beings, it is the structure of Da-sein; hypnotized, the patient comes to a prototypical image in his mind’s great database of memories.  He finds the father-figure, the mother, images of loved ones.  Laying on the couch, the being is analyzed.  Then the analyst puts it all in his chamber of permutation, his mind, and configures an outline of the being’s psyche and projects it before the patient.  “This is who you are, this is what you’re afraid of.”
	Picasso tackled one of the most basic human emotions: fear.  Many of his characters seem horribly frail, frightened, shivering.  He paints these thin, meek wraiths, confining them to the canvas for life. Cubism has that aesthetic, the aesthetic of silence, of planes, of granular substances.  The atmospherics of the situation help distort reality.  The painter wills his painting to becoming true, truest, most realistic representation of the object existing in the mind in the moment.  Through this process the object is projected on a grid and operates as a sort of fractal image, broken into pieces, each piece a representation of the whole, each section of the painting IS the object, a mandolin, a bottle.  In synthetic cubism the object is truly recreated; in analytical cubism the image is only portrayed as it exists in the mind, how it appears in the cerebration that allows the object to be perceived.
	
	Proust and recollection:
	Marcel Proust wrote in the late 1800s and was very influential.  Proust’s mission was not to ‘describe a life as it actually was, but a life as it was remembered by the one who had lived it’ [Benjamin 202].  Already, we sort of have the fabric on which cubism was woven.  A few simple variations to Proust and we have not a mémoire involontaire, but a perception volontaire.  The painter’s will approaches the object in the moment of perception, recreates it on the canvas in a ceremony.
	Walter Benjamin says ‘it was to be Proust’s aim to design the entire inner structure of society as a physiology of chatter’ [p.206 ‘Illuminations’].  These inner structures are the walls of Cubism, the foundation it stands on.  Perhaps the comparison is not perfect.  Proust would undoubtedly be an influence to the cubists.  So would Gide.  All great European thinkers of the turn of the 20th century formed one of the facets of Cubism, be it mathematics or physics or literature.

	Cubism and the Eye:
	A comparison has been made in ‘Biology of ourselves’ by Gordon S. Berry between the eye and the camera.  The lens of the camera which focusses the light rays on a sensitive screen is the lens of the eye.  The diaphragm of the camera which controls the amount of light entering the camera is the iris in the eye.  The aperture of the camera, an opening to allow light to enter, is the pupil in the eye.  The film, the light-sensitive screen on which the image is focussed, in the eye is the retina.  And the camera’s case, its support structure which excludes extraneous light is the sclera in the eye.
	Cubism, to me, resembles the prism.  ‘When white light strikes a glass prism at a particular angle, it separates the light into the colours of the spectrum’ [Berry 183].  The cubist painter extracts from experience the same semiotic spectrum.  The cubist’s spectrum is the range of his symbols, of his signs.  Obviously, he also uses the primary colors that the eye registers.
	Another resemblance between the eye and cubism is the negative after-images that appear if you look at an object for 30 seconds and then stare at a white wall.  Cubism has its version of that, in many of Picasso’s visages we see these surreal colorings of the skin.  


	

Mathematics and Cubism:
	David Hilbert was a leading mathematician of the turn of the 20th century.  In 1900 he addressed the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris, and described 23 important mathematical problems.  In his speech, he outlined his philosophy of mathematics.  His 23 problems would serve as areas of investigation for many a following mathematician.  David Hilbert, then, very well could have been influential.

“In the meantime, while the creative power of pure reason is at work, the outer world again comes into play, forces upon us new questions from actual experience, opens up new branches of mathematics, and while we seek to conquer these new fields of knowledge for the realm of pure thought, we often find the answers to old unsolved problems and thus at the same time advance most successfully the old theories. And it seems to me that the numerous and surprising analogies and that apparently prearranged harmony which the mathematician so often perceives in the questions, methods and ideas of the various branches of his science, have their origin in this ever-recurring interplay between thought and experience.”
—‘Mathematical Problems’ by Professor David Hilbert, 1900

	Pure thought, then, is on the agenda around the opening of the 20th century.  I’ve constantly been trying to put cubism in its rightful context.  A lot of people were working late trying to solve problems in the first years of the 1900s.  Many thinkers laboured many long hours.  Cubism, then, should be the term utilized to describe the first 20 odd years of the 20th century, from 1904 or so to 1925, 1928.  But then again, we could easily call this new historical period Capitalism because that’s what it actually was.
	Capitalism brought the camera as well as plastic.  Capitalism’s impact on the art world would be huge.  When an object is seen as a commodity and as a spokesthing of the historical cycle it is part of, the movement of the mind as it conceptualizes the object as a commodity and how it cerebrates the various abstract equivalences between commodities, this is infinitely close to the realm of Cubism and other movements of the time.  If time were taken away, Cubism would still exist because it broke down time’s barriers.  Cubism was a formulaic dance inscribing the rhythm of the heart in its untimely hiddenness.

	V
Propositional science is the best phrase to exhibit the truth of Cubism in its medical textbook aesthetic.  Cubist writers were able to write with perfect accuracy, strikingly and exponentially real.  The Logic of Cubism lies in propositional discourse, from the ideological ‘I am a creator’ to ‘art is a lifestyle and precinct to courtliness’.  The matter that makes up Cubism’s epistemology can be decreed in such a fashion: a)the object/perspective, b)aesthetic, c)style, d)theory, e)metaphysic, f)size, g)medium, h)time, i)themes, j)phenomenological dialogue.  The latter is a discourse between the one and his or her environment, the first reading and writing function of human existence, the pure state of being, the first state of being: an involvement with phenomena between man and his universe in the first moments of life to the last breath; all the particles that come into contact with one person, all the laws and forces involved, social, political, ecological, geographic, laws of the court, the trials and tribulations of daily experience, the full range of data that can be deduced, inducted, brandished in paper cups, words spilling out of the page, man and his natural world, environmental space; the spatiality of discourse, phenomenology as the ‘strange space’ of modern physics, the logical strain that seeps in the most basic of enunciations: setting.  The challenge is to capture Cubism when and where it is taking place.  This happens when perspective is prominent, when perspective is part of the problematic.
The second unit [enunciation] in the spatiality of discourse beside setting is expression.  That is how the theatre is constructed.  There are other ways.  One, as in Surrealism, can build an entire unconscious-symbolic wheel of meaning and abstract value with automatic painting.  It is a metaphysical illusion.  It involves the body, the mind, and the medium of space between all beings.
The Body.  Before getting medical, we have Mimes, Mallarmé, Diderot, and the paradox of the actor.  In the late 1800s, mimesis comes into the light, people go see mimes perform, mimes perform in the streets of Paris, influence the young Cubist painters.  The childhood of the average cubist painter was being lived in the two last decades of the 1800s.  Childhood and the mimetic function.  This is another aspect of Cubism that can most readily be seen in Picasso’s simplistic paintings, basic forms, elegant brushstroke, a dance with the brush, a casual causality rendered memorable in semi-life-like projections in the macabre theatre of modern actuality.
Again, before Medicine, we have the Body of the Church.  When things get mixed up between Medicine [science] and Religion [Church], we have a positive fluctuation in metaphysical reality in man.  Body and Mind are separated and the problem begins.  Cubism unites it all in the art it generates.  The aesthetic is medical but the paintings are spiritual masterpieces.  Braque and Picasso’s joint improvisations led to brilliant syncopation of abstraction from real objects, rhythmic gestures, elegance of phrase, mind to body collision on canvas.  By medical, we mean anatomical.  Cubism has an Anatomy, birthed in an anatomical serum, liquid that fluctuates and makes mirages.
Take Gray’s Anatomy for a second.  It is a compendium of the different parts of the human body, the human anatomical system.  This resembles Cubism in its multi-dimensionality: in recreating the body part by part, the anatomist seizes all the different perspectives of the body and melts them into one complex prose [with images] that constructs a basically abstract principle: man in-himself.
Wylie Sypher, in ‘Rococo to Cubism’, says: “The special consciousness in the enlightenment was grounded, as Whitehead also noted, in a system of thought framed by seventeenth-century mathematicians, a system very abstract and presenting, on the one hand, precisely located bodies, and, on the other, mind, which succeeded in constructing a conceptual framework of time and space to enclose these simply located bodies.  Newton was the chief architect of this world-order, and his system inspired a religious attitude called deism, centering on a God who was a mathematical intellect.”

It brings it Geometry.  We could say anatomy and geometry are two of the main influences that created Cubism in the 20th century; Enlightenment anatomy and geometry + the Industrial Revolution = Cubism.  It isn’t always as simple, however, as such an equation.  A movement in art is always a complex construct.  Theatricality is another important fraction of Cubism’s true being.  De Stijl, Bauhaus, Suprematism, and Futurism would be the kith and kin of Cubism.

Vernon Hyde Minor, in ‘Art History’s History’ speaks of Les Demoiselles d’Avignon as the first example of Cubism, and says on its subject, it is ‘a style and conceptual form that confronts order and rationality, logical representation, and the embodiment of Western values so necessary to European painting since the Renaissance.’ [p.167]
Here, Cubism is brought near the concept of the Renaissance, as though it came right out of it, which it did, though it waited as long as it could to immediately pop up, ravenous for museum wall-space.  The Cubists’ first North American explosion was, I believe, at studio 291 in New York.

To recap, Cubism was a new metaphysical reality that hit the world early in the 20th century.  One of the terms of this metaphysics was Fragmentation; by fragmentation of the mind and of the canvas, Cubism’s conditions of existence were made evident.  

Kant, Cubism, and Painting [Art History]:
We have mentioned Immanuel Kant a few times in this essay.  The more I read Kant, the more I see his direct influence on Cubist thought; for Kant paved the way for much of the thoughts of the 19th and 20th centuries.  In the ‘Critique of Pure Reason’, Kant speaks of the transcendental subject, the object in-itself which the senses cannot reach.  Our sensuous intuition can only perceive phenomena which by natural laws in the realm of experience, come from the noumenon.  When I look at my cup, I am receiving sensuous intuitions of it and conceiving those phenomena in my mind.  Cubism is involved with the latter part of the process of perception/experience.  We can see room for new styles, styles based on the sensuous intuition of objects, which is reminiscent of Abstract Expressionism.  They deal with the purely emotional plane, but have a rational side.  All modern styles have a strikingly important rationality to them.
Cubism is interested in the succession of moments in time, of series.  When one views a painting of analytical cubism, on peruses over the surface of the object [the work of art], following a personal scan path.  The painting is an object of the conception of an object; it is a representation of a representation of a representation: first representation, sensuous intuition of the representations [phenomena] of an object; second representation, the conception of the object in the mind; third representation, the execution of a painting of the successive stages of the perception of an object.  The viewer of a Cubist painting then follows a deconstruction in the sense that he or she has sensuous intuitions of the painting, conceptions of the painting, and if they are lucky, they can paint something at home and enter the historical dialogue we call style.  Cubism, then, is multi-representational, and this criticality is what makes it so important as a style.  It leads directly to modern mathematics in fractal geometry.  Or to the ancient pyramids…
We need to talk about concepts if we are to talk about Cubism.  Much of Picasso’s paintings, as I have noted, seem to be Tarot cards; the characters [subjects] of the painting are trapped on a 2-dimensional playing card.  Each figure is a concept, in Cubism.  If I paint a mandolin, I mean music.  Therefore we have an epistemology in Cubist painting.  In the breaking apart and reconstructing of the object, not only does Cubism imitate the way pure reason works, it also relates to language, for painting has a language, a synonymy between signs in language and signs [figures, shapes, colors] in the artwork.  Ultimately, Cubism tells a story.  Each episode is a particular perspective on the object.  It is therefore multi-perspectival.  This we know.  There is then the possibility of a semiotics of visual culture, for Cubism itself is an episode in the history of visual culture.  And with Cubism’s pictorial signs, we can create an iconology of them.
I was reading Husserl’s ‘Formal and Transcendental Logic’ and it occurred to me that this knowledge could be used in the study of art history, because art is formal AND transcendental, and has its own logic.  Art history is the true transcendent in art.  So is the art object, the painting, sculpture.  Painting represents the phenomenology of spirit.  Unfortunately, I am not an aesthetician; therefore, I cannot fully express the finer details of the aesthetic of Cubism.
Cubism makes me think of Russian or Chinese dolls, the ones that fit perfectly into one another forming a chain.  The regress of the tableau-tableau, painting-within-a-painting, is similar to the progression we laid out of the representations involved in the Cubist painting.  The experience of a painting can be broken down and reconstructed a thousand times.  The painter can break down objects and reconstruct them as many times over.  There is always the possibility of starting over, for the artist.  Start on a fresh page or canvas.  An artist can come clean and start his entire career on a new plane, such as Picasso in his hermetic cubism phase, which nonetheless has elements of his earlier stylistic formations.
Insofar as an object is light, it presupposes the existence of dark.  In painting, an equality is sought between light and dark, to create a believable depth of field.  Cubism deconstructed the field of perception into singular divisibles that make up the whole, each part dancing within the frame of the painting.  Cubism also works beyond the frame, changing the potential experiences of the entire room.  
But is art something one can learn?  In Kant’s ‘Critique of Judgment’ he writes about the master/student relationship in fine arts.  Art can be taught, it seems.  But what about the whole business of genius?  Is it a gift?  Does it even exist?  This can be understood in respects to style.  
And important 20th century style is Synthetic cubism which is about omission, dislocation, and fragmentation of the normal representation of an object.  It breaks down, deconstructs the object, and reconstructs it with its various phemonena, disposition, shape-character, hue, intensity.  The path is that of a synthesis.  Kant teaches us the synthesis in his Critique of Judgment.  The Arts and Crafts movement in England in the 19th century led to the popularity of Art Nouveau, and out of these nearing-modernist episodes in art history, cubism was on the back burner just simmering fructiferous and full of a delightful and streaming impetus [with its papiers collés and Collages; synthetic cubism].
Synthetic Cubism is about new modes of representation, a non-illusionistic style with a new palette of colors, intense and brighter colors than in Analytical Cubism.  Analytical cubism is about dissection and  subdivision whereas Synthetic Cubism is about concreteness of experience, demonstration, and building the object.  It is about stretching each medium to its highest point of the objective-metaphysical pedigree of moments.  
“The Eye.  As a physical instrument the eye consists essentially of a lens system, a variable diaphragm called the iris, and a sensitive “screen” called the retina, on which are projected images of external objects.”—[p.512, College Physics, D.C. Heath and Company Boston, 1950]
Cubism reacts like the eye in the above paragraph in a simple allegory where the canvas is the retina, the palette is the iris, and the lens system is the painter and the painter’s mind creating modern music of paint and poésie.

Hermetic Cubism:
First of all, I would like to say something about
the antinomy of figure and ground in painting.

The dialectic of figure and ground in painting [antinomy]
In the dialectic of painting, we have the antinomy of figure and ground.  The ground, or background, is the negative space of the figure.  The figure is the apparent shape, be it a pipe or a still life.  Douglas R. Hofstadter calls a purposely ambiguous mixture of figure and ground, a recursive representation.  One in which the figure was drawn and the ground is a necessary consequence, is a cursive representation, though he didn’t use the same exact words.  The dialectic of figure and ground is important to the understanding of Analytical Cubism.
In the multi- or inter-perspectives of Cubism, not only are various planes present simultaneously, but in viewing the painting, figure and ground are played with in our consciousness.  As we view the composite image, figure and ground move in and out of each other, creating tension and movement in the painting.  
Figure and ground can easily be related to music.  Two of the primordial elements of music are melody and harmony; where melody is the figure, harmony is the ground.  Now, this statement is not perfect, it has some faults.  Harmony is not merely the ground; harmony is much more complex.  But where a melody is above the background music, this underlying harmonic structure is inevitably the ground.  You see, Cubism isn’t only applied to painting.  Cubism is a style and as a style extends through all the arts.  This goes along with our belief that Cubism is musical.
The multi-perspective was recontextualized in Surrealism as an object that was two or three objects all at the same time.  Arcimboldo hints both at Collage and ambiguity of figure, and paradoxicality of figure and ground.
The achieved hero painter of light in Cubism creates a fiasco everywhere he or she goes.  There is also the dialectic of object and representation.  All is planar by the rule of antinomies.  The dialectic of figure and ground extends to dark and light, on the rainbow from red to violet through the full panchromy.  We are building and disseminating systems.  Analytical cubism works with micro-tonalities, micro-politics of movement, the economy of signification; the representation is made according to how the object is conceived in the mind.  Synthetic cubism opens the door to hermetic cubism; it paved the way for a study of atmosphere, of symbolism, of organic mysticism.  

Aesthetic experience of cubism:
There are several different aesthetic experiences in Cubism.  One is the aesthetic of Analytical formality, the other is Synthetic or metamorphosistic, and the third is Hermetic.  The hermetic phase of cubism transcends the other two stages.  Cubism is a polyaesthetic with momentary re-enactments.  It is relived whenever one focuses on time as an ageing substance and a factor of spiritual growth.
The object is projected from the fabric of the mind through the hands to the canvas.  We have a synthesis whereby the microsubstantiveness of the object’s shapehood and colorness make for the possibility of a tangible reading of the painting.  The syntax changes between Analytical Cubism and Synthetic Cubism.
Analytical Cubism has a unique syntax within the image; it is the systematic, orderly arrangement of the various perspectives of the object.  Synthetic Cubism’s syntax is in the pattern of representation of the various representations [facts, features, phenomena] of the object.  In terms of syntax we can see the real different between Analytical and Synthetic Cubism.  1.Analytical cubism breaks the object down into the various perspectives of the object and has a periodical syntax; 2. Synthetic Cubism fractures the object down into the component aspects of its objective state and uses a divisional syntax.  Analytical Cubism retells the story of the object and Synthetic Cubism reconstitutes the object.  Therefore, the second is a synthesis whereby the first is an analysis.  Analytical Cubism is an analysis and is temporal; Synthetic Cubism is a synthesis and is spatial [textural].
This is where Kant comes in, because he taught us the analysis and the synthesis.  In the Transcendental Analytic, Kant gives us an analysis of the understanding by which we gather representations of the object; in his Transcendental Dialectic, Kant teaches us the proper way to synthesize, by stating the antinomies and resolving them.  In Synthetic Cubism, everything is warped; we are in the process of a synthesis; we state, say, the light in the object while keeping our eye on the darkness.  We are constantly taking into consideration each extreme of the object’s component aspects.  For instance, is the object is round, we try to warp it towards the straight and angular to the point just before it becomes incomprehensible as the object the painting states.  So the two antinomies here are Circular and Angular, say.  Many antinomies exist in painting, as we have seen in the dialectic of figure and ground.  Analytical Cubism is involved in a regress or a progression whereby we see the object in all its various possible perspectives [succession of moments], keeping the proportion intact.  Synthetic Cubism works with manipulating proportion amongst other things.  That’s why we call Synthetic Cubism ‘fluctuant representation’.  We could call Analytical Cubism ‘relative representation’.  AC is abstract; SC is concrete.  That’s another way to look at it.  The Analysis always precedes the Synthesis.
Synthetic Cubism NEEDS color.  Analytical Cubism can do without, because it isn’t the attributes of the object per se that we are painting.  We paint its forms through time.  But we can see stages in the history of Cubism where the art work is both Analytical AND Synthetic Cubism.  Hermetic Cubism is what happens in methods when they pass the stage of synthesis: the style curves back onto itself, spiralling inwardly in a dark and backward spin-cycle of organic or mathematical [or other] symbolism.

Answering some questions:
What is it for?
What is painting for? What is art for? What is living about? Why was happiness sought after for so long? I say it was a means by which modern thought was synthesized, because an object has an
instantaneity to it whereby much knowledge and philosophy can be directly processed through the eye which is our strongest link to the world. Cubism, in its Analytical phase, gave a strong exposition or drawing of the questions of time, of the succession of moments, how one whole line of connected moments were represented in ONE painting, expanding the aesthetic experience to more than just one frame of the object. It's meant to expand our horizons as thinkers. It has an aesthetic appeal, it was meant to create a new sense of beauty, because beauty could now be the broken up, the non-standard, the abstract.

What does Cubism do to your heart?
Cubism strikes a huge chord in my heart. As a modern citizen of the earth, I find myself focused much of the time on machines, because machines are all around me, I sleep to the sounds of cars and
trains. Construction next door starts at 7AM or so. Cubism gives me a sense of security because: since Picasso and Braque gave us an aesthetic design for modern life, I know that I'm not the only one to be truly affected by those mangled shapes when I look at objects. Why Cubism? To stretch the eye, to let it view new possibilities. Because the basis of many-perspectives-all-at-once when viewing it touches our unconscious, revealing the fragments that we are to SYNTHESIZE, and that's what Synthetic Cubism teaches us. With all that we saw in Analytical Cubism, Synthetic Cubism gave us the closing of what AC 'opened' for us in representational possibility. Synthetic Cubism reassessed the situation. I would say that the purpose of Analytical Cubism is Synthetic Cubism. I will try to write more later, I have to go.

Why do we like it?
Because it is truly modern, like us.

How does it speak to our inner longings?
Analytical Cubism is based on the process by which our understanding conceives the objects
surrounding us. This is very much part of our inner life. Cubism speaks to us because it IS us: it is the
understanding which is our most sacred part. The whole process of seeing an object, it goes from the
object which is viewable as representations of the actual noumenon that we can't touch perceptually,
then our senses represent the object to our minds; in painting you carry the representational measure
one step further, you represent the object represented to the mind, and then the viewer of your painting represents the representations of representations of representations. That sacred dance is what Cubism was founded on. Some more later..

***
In Cubism we have modifications to the objective character of the reality before us.  What is an Abstract Expressionist Cubist painting?  It would be a complete abstraction, a rational one which states the various phenomena of an object or landscape simultaneously on the canvas.  In this case, the representation would be abstract, not the recognizable forms in regular Cubism.  Conceptual art is what made these connections between styles possible.  You could now say you were an expressionist futurist, or a shapist pure and simple.  As long as you had an idea, a philosophy, you were in the boat.  But since then the boat has left the shore and we are on a long journey through confusion and abstract mathematics.  We will someday come to an island and we’ll have a new style like did Cubism such arrive from the mist of sea.
	Art from the beginning of human history can be seen as one long and constant movement.  All movements in art advocate the same number of points.  They all form the same circle/cycle.  Cubism created a fault in the architectonics of visual culture.  The object became fragmented.  It reminds me of William Carlos Williams and his cubist fragmentation of line and verse.  Everything is broken up into the short line, the syntactical.  This new syntax forms much of the appeal of Cubism.  History later…

So what we have said is this:

Analytic Cubism: the painter makes an analysis of the object, recording many different perspectival
   'takes' or 'viewings' on/of the object [periodical syntax]. Time is of the essence [temporal].

   Synthetic Cubism: the painter makes a synthesis of the object whereby he breaks down the object
   into the component aspects of its objective nature and reconstitutes it, modified, modulated,
   manipulated [divisional syntax]. Space is of the essence [textural].

Rational, is the cubist object the same for everyone?  Do we all have the same conceptions of objects?  Cubism portrays the conception of the object, and I think, the phenomena of the object themselves as sensuous intuitions.  

Talking about cubism and how it is part of Kant’s system, Conceptual art is the idea part of pure reason; cubism is the analytic of conceptions, Renaissance painting is the analytic of principles, Transcendental Aesthetic is Realism and Impressionism, Kinetic Art… Transcendental logic influenced phenomenologists who in turn touched art history directly.  Transcendental dialectic is post-modernism.  We are in an age of the development of the transcendental doctrine of method.  The system is closing.  We are prepared to move onto newer things.  

	Cubism and Music:
	One of the many ways in which to make your music ‘cubist’ is through sound textures.  Each sound texture that you use is a variation or different ‘perspective’ on a pure sine wave.  Also, in harmony, you can overlap chords, make polytonal organisms that you can then break apart and play what was just being played simultaneously, in arpeggiation, rather, or in some melody.
	Start with a simple blues chord progression.  Overlap the chords, break the chords into parts, play different intervals over chords, similar motifs, follow patterns, mathematical or otherwise.  Think of space.  Sound is vibrating air molecules.  Make a sound sculpture.  Variation is the key.  Change of perspective.
	You can change the sound texture, the speed, the rhythm, the harmony, the melody can go up or down scales or change timbre, turn into a quacking duck from a bell tone.  Theoretically, the laws of cubism can be applied to any art form, at any time, in any place.  Add a soupçon of cubism to the mix.  I dare you.
	I think costumes for the musicians and a set could help the ambience.  You’re shaping sound and noise, making a sculpture; you want LIFE in your sculpture, so use lights, explosions, costumes, think gimmicks, whatnot.  A show with a lot happening so that the viewer can choose what he/she will focus on from a wide palette of intertwined happenings.  Play things backwards.  Edgar Varèse comes to mind.
	
	The Prism:
	As I have said, particular Cubists works can be both Analytical and Synthetic.  Juan Gris is the best example.  He created still lifes with aspects of both philosophical schools [of Cubism].  I have noticed that cubist theories are also useful in understanding art history itself.  More on this in a diary entry [a facetology].

	Journal of the young artist as counterfeiter:
	I have been studying cubism and writing down what I learn from it as I go along.  It appears to me that the analytical and synthetic methods of representation in the 2-dimensional plane of the painting can be very useful in understanding the long list of concepts in art history.  By concepts, I mean concepts.  Art movements are concepts.  Representable aspects of an object can be conceptualized.  Everything, the matter of art history, follows the path from analysis to synthesis.  Style is a dialectic between art objects of the present and ones of the past.  Cubism is a style, has an aesthetic [philosophies of art and beauty], a new mode of perspectival representation, and a metaphysic [the status of the work, the creation of the work (ontology), the mechanics of the works].  There are several variations in the level of each emphasis: Analytical Cubism is more focused on representations of time/form fragments/facets as Synthetic Cubism with the reconstructed object.  It brings up the object known as the film camera, with its long lengths of tape, moments in succession, periods, cycles, reiteration laws.  Mutation is rampant in Synthetic Cubism.

[must write a novel or short story about a group of artists, two artists working closely like Picasso and Braque, a philosophical work about the struggle of two chrome-poets feeding off each other and creating a new style.  Write about a wealthy female friend (Gertrude Stein) and basically write the story following the historical facts of Cubism.  Make it full of action, full of ups and downs, and full of tension and misunderstandings.]

	Conclusion:
As is well known, Picasso and Braque spent many years side by side creating off of each other.  Another little known fact is that they had long conversations about realities of the mind, long discourses together that they never did divulge to the public.
	There’s a hiddenness in the true tenets of Cubism.  Only a select few were part of the culture.  More than a few, of course, but in comparison to the population of the world, Cubism is still today rather unknown to most people.  It’s because to understand Cubism you need to dance with Cubism, embrace it, follow it, be its apprentice.  I have tried to show in this essay the path that I have had up till now with Cubism as my mentor.  
	This is it, I have written the beginning of my textbook of art history.  The next section is called Surrealism, and is much longer, about twice the length.  The third part, called On Art History, is probably thrice the length of this one.  Each one has its particular style for its particular mission.
	Cubism is a complex of representatives.  It is a school of thought, a technique, a philosophy, an iconology.  They made musical masterpieces of guitars and mandolins.  The music just breathes through their work.  They captured a metaphysical reality and maintained a rational criticality at all times.
	Cubism: science of the mental construct…

APPENDIX:
Dimensions:

I’ve had this idea in my mind since I was sixteen of a sort of mathematical problem, or maybe it’s something physics would harbor.  At any rate, for the fifth time, I will try to paint a clear picture of what is going on within the framework of this idea.

Imagine a 2-dimensional plane.  The plane extends to infinity.  It has two dimensions, length and width.  A point can move everywhere within the plane, and 2-dimensional figures can be made within the plane.  What we have, though, is a 3-dimensional object, a cube, passing through this infinitely thin plane.  What happens is that within the 2-dimensional plane, the cube can only be seen in 2-dimensional fragments.  The cube is moving towards the 2-dimensional plane with one of its corners facing the plane.  The first piece of the cube that the 2-dimensional universe experiences is a point, the point of the vertex.  As the cube moves through the 2D plane, it becomes perceptible as a triangle.  As the cube moves through the plane, the triangle grows.  So far, within the 2D plane, we have experienced a point becoming a triangle and the triangle growing.  The triangle grows until a second corner in the cube passes through the 2D plane.  What we experience in the 2-dimensional plane is the triangle becoming a quadrilateral figure, depending of course at which angle exactly the cube is moving through the plane.  It is entirely possible that the cube moves in such a way that after the first corner moves through the 2D plane, the next moment two more corners pass through, at which point it is the largest triangle possible in the cube.  Directly following that moment, the triangle shrinks back down until it is a point again at which point the cube has breached the 2D plane completely.  There was another part of this problem that I cannot remember at the moment.  Something happened, I think the cube rotated in such a way that several different quadrilateral shapes we made possible in the 2-dimensional plane.  The problem, I believe, has to do with time.  If the 2-dimensional plane experiences a cube moving through it, the phenomenon of time is taking place.  Time is often called the fourth dimension, so then the 2D plane is actually a 3-dimensional plane, length, width, and time.  How is it possible that a 3-dimensional plane has no depth, length and width only?  It was a strange idea when I thought of it, and it still keeps its strangeness.
