CUBISM II:
***
	I
	Cubism is a movement in art which occurred in Europe from 1907 to 1925 roughly.  Throughout those years the style changed shape many times, as did the group of cubist painters themselves.  Not only did each individual painter develop, evolve, but the group itself grew and eventually split into different groups of cubists doing different things.  Cubism was really a multitude of styles, and exists today in our minds as a conglomeration of many different styles, different single manifestations of it, different names, places, subjects, and the bulk of existing criticism of cubism is full of varying concepts and theories [on cubism].

	II
	“The stories relating the history of the discovery of Cubism all seem to have an element of the apocryphal in them.  Each writer relating the story of the discovery tells a different version.  Some attribute the development of Cubism to an interest in African Negro Sculpture, some to the impact of the Cézanne Exhibits of 1905-1906, some trace the development of Cubism to the awakening interest in El Greco, others to Iberian sculpture.  Fabureau even gives a version attributing the invention of Cubism to a joking “portrait” modified by Max Jacob.  Yet again, the development of Cubism is traced to the effect of the somber Spanish landscape on Picasso during his trip to Spain in the fall of 1906.  In a way all these theories are wrong, yet they have an element of truth.”—p.43, ‘Cubist Aesthetic Theories’, Christopher Gray [1953]

	III
Jean Metzinger in 1910 introduced the idea that cubism dealt with multiple views.  This is an extremely important thing to remember, because nearly all texts on Cubism written involve the concept of multiple views of the object depicted.  There’s reason to believe that this is a misconception, and not at all what Picasso and Braque, who created cubism, set out to do initially.  Other texts say that the cubists were painting the object as it is conceived.  This already is closer to what was originally intended, but in the study of the beginnings of an art movement in art history, one cannot know for sure what actually happened—who made the first cubist brushstroke, what the intentions of the painter were.  We cannot know if the painter of the first cubist painting was even aware of what he was doing, though we assume he was.

IV
Kant has been brought into the argument from the division of Cubism’s periods into an Analytical and Synthetic style/phase.  In fact, conception or the object as-it-is-conceived is an important part of Kant’s ‘Critique of Pure Reason’, part of his complex system of human understanding.  Cubism would bring out the mathematico-theatrical [Baroque], paintings rich with life, with seventeen shades of brown.  Dust palette.
Different countries at the turn of the 20th century were evolving pan-chromatically in a nomadic movement/event, in a trans-national development in the arts, evolution, progression/regression, disruption in the fibre of the European [Western] mind; Holland with De Stijl, Vorticism in England, Cubism in France, Futurism in Italy, Suprematism and Rayonnism in Russia, Expressionism and later Bauhaus in Germany; all countries on an idealistic mission to represent modern reality.  No shift such as this had been known in thought and art since the Renaissance.  It was a panchromatic [pan-national] disruption in the human psyche and experience.

V
	REACTING TO CHANGE: Modernism 101
	The modernist spirit… reality is universally in a state of change.  That is the relationship of time to space; matter is constantly in motion on a molecular and macrocosmic level.  All is upset into perpetual action.  This means that yes initially a history of modernism will show us a movement that was taking place in every corner of the globe, in Europe and in the Americas, Asia, etc.  But a second look shows us that as everything is in constant change, every changing thing is different through time to itself and also different to other changing things.  In this sense, America at the turn of the 20th century differs greatly socially and politically from Europe at the same time.  One can add, though, that a country that is undergoing great change resembles any country in all of history that is/was undergoing great changes.  One says that the political landscape in France from 1905-1914 differed greatly from America’s scenario at the same time.  There were coincidences, however, as there was contact between France and America.  They are not completely alike nor completely different.  The thing is, though, that modernism came into action in both Europe and America at the same time, thought his is not our main point.  Our main point is that modernism [and movements in general], do not happen on a global scale; movements happen within tribes, one could say, or communities, situations, events, change happens on the microcosmic level and accumulates to eventually reach the global scale, but this sort of art historical change happens in quick jolts over small areas of space, short moments of time.  Within a single artist’s mind complete change can occur.  His or her interactions with other artists will cause his/her ideas to be promulgated directly into the societal fabric, a fabric made of human minds, behaviorisms, action/reaction, the swelling soup of cause and effect.
	What we are trying to say is that surely a history exists, a chronology of Cubism, but that also a discourse exists outside Cubism’s time-frame, a discourse in 2002 which involves aspects of Cubism that are not at all sequential, such as the philosophical implications of certain techniques; this happens on another plane altogether, than the one of chronology.  Once philosophy gets a hold of Cubism, it becomes a synchrony, it becomes conceptual and no longer successive.
	The spirit of modernism has existed since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.  As man moved through the stages of modernization, of industrialization, he had to shift his ideas to accommodate his shifted/ing reality.  The pastoral landscape to the new city was an anachronism, a real relic.  How did the old world grow so old so fast?
	Relating cubist works and cubist painters to conventions of thought takes each instance out of chronological time and examines it in critical time.  Critical time does not adhere to chronology because each critical instance ties in with all other critical instances in history, creating pan-temporal constellations instead of a length of rosary beads.  

	VI
	Picasso said something once about how the past and the future didn’t exist when you were creating a work of art, alluding possibly that art was in the present and therefore timeless.  This is what makes art synchronous.  The moment of creation is timeless, is out of time, is made in disjointed time, or is made disjointed from time.  

	It is no longer possible for anyone to assert with perfect certainty what Cubism was; we can only gather up the different assessments of what Cubism may have been, round up the sites of Cubism in literary explanations that the history of art criticism has collected for us and reflect them to the reader.  What I mean is that I cannot say Cubism has anything to do with a possible fourth dimension; I can only state that writers such as Maurice Raynal believed that Cubists painted objects as they saw them according to the law of ‘The Fourth Dimension’ [1913, What is Cubism?].  

	What can be the philosophical implications of papiers collés?  Picasso was handy with newspaper clippings, purposely juxtaposing different articles to create specific discursive textures.  By discursive textures, I mean a discourse simply, that Picasso created a dialogue between literary artefacts from a popular-commercial culture.  There is the dialogue between elements in the painting, the dialogue between painter, painting and viewer, and a dialogue between painters, art critics, and art historians of the past and present.  Philosophy handles art history well.  

	VII Literary Cubism:
Gertrude Stein, Virginia Woolf, André Gide, and William Carlos Williams have all in at least one instance had one or more of their works given the label of literary cubism. Pirandello is another. It's difficult to set the rules for literary cubism because in the span of cubism in painting from 1907 to the mid-1920s, there never really was a group of cubist writers; it's a label that was given to particular works after the fact. But nonetheless, there is such a thing because cubism translates well to literature.
Gide's novel 'Les Faux-Monnayeurs' I have often seen heralded as literary cubism and having read it, I can see the case for it. It's a novel that needs to be constructed by the reader much like the works of Synthetic Cubism whose objects the viewer constituted in his/her mind. Stein is a cubist in an altogether different way; literary cubism in Stein can be seen in the constant variation she induces into her phrases, reminiscent of the multiple perspectives of analytical cubism or the constant 'faceting' of surfaces, and her noun-based works, in a way I can't yet express, have the Synthetic appeal. William Carlos Williams' works are very visual, and in fact he himself had stated that he was trying to imitate the early-20th-century New York painters. Many of Williams' poems can be read forward or backward keeping the same integrity and sense. I haven't read too much Virginia Woolf, but what I did read, 'Mrs. Dalloway' has multiple perspectives, but to be honest, cubism wasn't meant to be about multiple perspectives, this was only something critics interpreted about the art. Theories on the nature of cubism, and there are hundreds, can get so complicated, it makes me want to try and explain it in simpler terms, say in such a way that there would be three things that make a work of art cubist, either you have the three things or you're not cubist, but writing such a theory is nearly impossible. To me, in my mind, cubism is an aesthetic, and that aesthetic is the ONE thing that makes a work cubist or not cubist, and I've found numerous instances where a work of art borders on the cubist, say in Burroughs, in ee cummings, Pasternak.. literary cubism is something you FEEL; it has to FEEL cubist, and what does cubism feel like? monotonous with repetition in dry light, muted underwater tones the oceanside with birds carrying mythology in their beaks, bugs' eyes and aviation, the telescope, microscope, camera, and kaleidoscope flushed in a lacquer's gloss finish, pasted paper and juxtaposition of enunciative measures, propositions, planes... a cachet hiding a pirate's loot, voilà and the barricade explodes... a torn sky... midnight blue... Autumn rust in agrarian farmhouse box-cupboards bookshelves sound of crackling woodplank...

I swear the more I study cubism the less clear it becomes, all the more elusive. It's the kind of thing
that can be learned but can't be taught. It can be exhibited but not explained. Personally, I feel it has to do with time, with a series of moments tied together in a chain, with teleology quite rightly. But the extent to which historians have 'added' things to cubism is wild and outrageous. Cubism in nearly a hundred years has grown more complicated than it was at the time. All it was really was pictures accommodating a new industrial way of life, pictures that today are very familiar, but to a 1910-bonhomme were not yet common knowledge. The real question is how to understand papier collé semiotically, discursively, and as historical materialism. Cubism can be understood ideologically and technically, but it will always remain obscured by the ardent & immortal will-power of its very ingenious creators.

	VIII
	A plateau ranging through the years 1907 to 1914 to begin with, circling from 1905 to 1925, erupting in 1927, winding up from 1870 to 1901; a snowflake made of cutting folded paper generally full of holes but a body nonetheless; 1907 Les Demoiselles D’Avignon, Picasso, Nude Woman by Braque a little later, all a recapitulation and rehearsal of Cézannian metaphysics, or is it mathematics, logistics, withdrawal of, absence of, portrayal of…
	To paint a portrait of 1907-1914, the rise of cubism which would keep rising till the mid-1920s but was interrupted by World War, is to castrate theoretic prose and make a hole-ridden snowflake puzzle of a time that defeats dismissal into explanatory notes.  Cubism remains the Inexplicable.
	But cubist paintings in 2002 ring true.  A painting is misplaced the day it finishes its first exhibition.  Thus the usefulness of photographic documentation to record the aura, the breathing space of a work that has such a short life.  Cubism would float perhaps out of the mixture of anticlericalism and clericalism, anti-church-state and pro-socialist-state general attitude.  It was a time of polarization, a time of separate camps, of mass digestion of the Past.
	It’s entirely possible that cubism rose out of a repeated mistake made by Cézanne, or a possible lack of perspective.  Cézanne’s technique of passage can be seen in early Renaissance paintings if one wanted to find it there.

	IX
	“To Daniel-Henry Kahnweiler, in a moment of impatience, he quoted the notice affixed to the bridge of steamers on the Seine, “It is forbidden to speak to the pilot”; and this use of a ploy that amused him was evidently representative of a recurrent strategy on his part, since an American, Gelett Burgess, who attempted an interview in 1908, found that it was only after much humorous fencing and side-tracking on Picasso's part that he could be induced to say anything serious about his concerns as an artist.” [‘The Interpretation of Cubism’, p.22, Mark Roskill, 1985]

	“The diagrams found in textbooks and popular publications also come up as having provided a possible stimulus: not only those on the Fourth Dimension using multiple projections (as in E. Jouffret's Traité elémentaire, 1903), but also those illustrating stereo-chemistry and chain-structures of minerals, and the new visual psychology as expounded by William James in his Principles of Psychology (French trans. 1909) and Ernest Mach, whose La connaissance et l'erreur, as it was titled in its French translation of 1908, included essays on the philosophy of spatial perception as understood from a physiological and psychological standpoint. Such comparisons are not entirely specious, since they indicate an affinity of a very general kind between “difficulties” of the new art, understood as a way of discovering what lay "behind" appearances, and the concern of the time to make the underlying principles of new speculation in those areas graspable to a more general audience, as principles of “discovery”.” [Roskill 36]

X
Possible Timeline For The Birth Of Cubism:
Photography for the public, Kodac 1888
X-ray, 1895
Theory of Relativity, 1905

…

Harlequin, Pierrot, the colors of their costumes, use them… masks, constructivism… 
 a book of writings, scribblings, of a delusional man, or a man making all sorts of plans for a theatre production, for buildings, for books, stories, grandiose poetic works… a book written in little spurts, speedy drafts, slowly connecting it all into a magnum opus of unseen dimensions.  This book, at the same time, is a thesis on art history, is art history.  He goes through all the stages art has gone through since the dawn of the Industrial Revolution.  



Recreate cubism using variation in a Steinian fashion, each line a variation, creating a Baroque harmony of meaning and textuality, the cubist textbook. [A CUBIST ESSAY: it would have the Steinian sort of aphoristic/propositional slow-evolution bombardment, it would have to mingle fact and fiction, therefore it would use facts such as Les Mademoiselles D’Avignon was completed in 1907, and pseudo-facts, inventions, interpretations, such as that the cubists were painting The Fourth Dimension.  It would be partly documentary, using Edward Fry’s Cubism, would touch the politics of early 20th century France, and also some writings on the other arts, Satie in particular.  I don’t know how that last part makes it cubist.  It would be there just to build the climate, the context, the landscape of the years 1905-1920.  The object of the Cubist Essay would be Cubism, therefore we must show the object from several perspectives, we must deconstruct and reconstruct the object.  We could call the essay The Philosophical Brothel.  Juxtaposition, superimposition, layering, transparencies, planes interlocking, overlapping… I want to talk about collage and have the essay BE a collage.  What I want to say about collage is how Picasso and Braque meticulously chose their newspaper clippings, their labels, with a sort of semiotic consciousness.  Language and Cubism, collage as the putting together of words into sentences, Cubism and Expression… Expression and Time…]

I want to write an essay on the method I used in my essay on Cubism, with bombast, irony, sonic tricks… method of quoting masters [writers, historians].  I want to turn it into a Cubist technique of art historical writing, this new text being the theory of the cubist technique of art historical writing.

the way I see society at the turn of the 20th century is in different fields, philosophy, science, art, and the different things happening in the different fields.  
————	————	————	———
————	————	————	———

	Feminism, Marxism, The Politics of Art History:

————	————	————	————	————	————
————	————	————	————	————	————
————	————	————	————	————	————

NOTES ON CUBISM:
…”The relation between avant-garde and political discourse has conventionally been over-simplified, where it has not been caricatured or ignored, in histories of modernism; my aim is to take account of, and to explore, through the example of cubism, the complex, over-determined and shifting character of this relation.” [David Cottington 2]
nationalism, patriotism, formation of the avant-garde => Maurras and Barrès… opposing camps
the role of Bergson, “The term ‘five o’clock Bergsonians’ was coined in reference to the crowds who packed the philosopher’s weekly public lectures.” [Cottington 57]
literary history of the petite revues, magazines catalogue entries, [art history can include the literary history of art criticism]
Henri Le Fauconnier an important figure, his painting L’Abondance was the cubist picture that travelled Europe the most.
THE PHILOSOPHICAL IMPLICATIONS OF CUBIST TECHNIQUES, literary and pictorial [representational]—what does collage mean philosophically?  It means a juxtaposition of different parts, an arrangement of a multiplicity of materials, 
COLLAGE, PAPIERS COLLES
Cultural politics, arts & craft movement in England was it? what was happening in the different cultures of the world in 1905-1914?




————	————	————	————	————	————
————	————	————	————	————	————
————	————	————	————	————	————

G.
“The stories relating the history of the discovery of Cubism all seem to have an element of the apocryphal in them.  Each writer relating the story of the discovery tells a different version.  Some attribute the development of Cubism to an interest in African Negro Sculpture, some to the impact of the Cézanne Exhibits of 1905-1906, some trace the development of Cubism to the awakening interest in El Greco, others to Iberian sculpture.  Fabureau even gives a version attributing the invention of Cubism to a joking “portrait” modified by Max Jacob.  Yet again, the development of Cubism is traced to the effect of the somber Spanish landscape on Picasso during his trip to Spain in the fall of 1906.  In a way all these theories are wrong, yet they have an element of truth.”
	—p.43, ‘Cubist Aesthetic Theories’, Christopher Gray [1953]

L.
“Kant remains an outsider, despite important work on several areas in which he has been instrumental to art history and to artists.  Some examples of his reception are so obvious that they tend to slip from our consciousness.  As Albert Boime has noted, many of the earliest responses to Kant were to the first Critique, to its apparent claims that we do not have access to the noumenal and that our knowledge of the world rests on our own faculties (1990: 329).  Kant’s first Critique is also the source for the famous analytic/synthetic distinction used early in discussions of Cubism to distinguish both working methods and chronological developments (green).  In both cases, Kant’s terminology entered non-philosophical discourse, with artists, critics, and historians referring to the “thing-in-itself” and to “analytic” procedures in Cubist composition.”
—p.8, ‘The Subjects of Art history: Historical Objects in Contemporary Perspective’, Mark A. Cheetham, ‘Immanuel Kant and the Bo(a)rders of Art History’

[Critique Mark A. Cheetham, find book reviews where writers disagree with the Kant thing]
————	————	————	————	————	————

“By far the most important element in the construction of any aesthetic system is the definition of the field of art itself.  Actually, this basic definition cannot be stated without implying even more fundamental assumptions about the nature of reality, the phenomenal world, truth, and even morality.  In short, certain metaphysical assumptions lie behind any aesthetic system no matter how deeply concealed or violently disavowed.”
—p.4 [Cubist Aesthetic Theories', Christopher Gray [1953]


An Aesthetic, however, cannot be questioned; it is at the level of the Aesthetic that allegory works its magic.


—the panchromatic pan-national disruption in the human psyche and experience itself—

In October 1912, Hourcade wrote that, “Il n’y a pas d’école cubiste” (Golding 26)

Metzinger in 1910 introduced the idea that cubism dealt with multiple views.  This is an extremely important thing to remember, because nearly all texts on Cubism written involve the concept of multiple views of the object depicted.

Hourcade was the first to relate cubist painting to Kantian aesthetics.


CHRONOLOGY:
The savagery of two of the figures in Picasso’s ‘Demoiselles D’Avignon’ is a passionate product of 20th century expressionism (Golding 47). 

‘Le Bordel Philosophique’ was Demoiselles D’Avignon’s first name (Golding 50), which seems to situate the painting more in a critical sphere.  

G.
—Picasso had two Iberian heads, stolen from the Louvre by Géry-Piéret and given to Apollinaire who sold them to Picasso in March 1907 (Golding 53).
—Janneau p.12 ‘L’Art Cubiste’ says Picasso came to know Negro culture in 1906 through Derain (Golding 56).  Gertrude Stein says ‘upon his return from Gosol he became acquainted with Matisse through whom he came to know African Sculpture’ (‘Picasso’ p.22) (Golding 55).

“Apollinaire felt that he had achieved simultaneity in his ‘poèmes conversations, où le poète au centre de la vie enrégistre en quelque sort le lyrisme ambiant’.”--[Golding 38] [Kerouac in Old Angel Midnight, Joyce in Finnegans Wake]

Earlier we had spoken about Picasso’s exposure to Iberian sculpture, how he actually owned for some time two Iberian heads.  It is a clever tool, if you think about it.  Linking Picasso to Iberian sculpture, for instance, can give him the mythical power he needs to lead an art movement.  Picasso-becoming-Legend is an important and often overlooked historical fact at the beginning of Cubism.  Watch for it in the texts.

G.
"Picasso liked to have money, there is no doubt about that, and he liked to keep it; but what sets him apart from most men in this respect is the fact that getting it did not fill him with elation. He found the whole business exhausting, particularly if it was accompanied by bargaining; but much more that that, he hated parting with his pictures. This was one of the very few things that stopped him working: the deep depression would not lift for . He loved his pictures, and he loved painting the, - could not conceive painting without love." (O'Brian 1994, 143-144) 

        “He stuffed the bank notes paid to him in a wallet until it became so crammed he did not dare leave it at home, but carried it about on his person in an inner pocket secured with a safety-pin. But affluence was bought at a price: he loathed parting with his own pictures. ‘Picasso was always distraught at having to sell his paintings,’ reports Fernande.” (Vallentin 1963, 81)

——————	——————	——————	——————	——————	——————
—the panchromatic pan-national disruption in the human psyche and experience itself—


Different countries at the turn of the 20th century were evolving pan-chromatically in a nomadic movement/event, in a trans-national development in the arts, evolution, progression/regression, disruption in the fibre of the European [Western] mind; Holland with De Stijl, Vorticism in England, Cubism in France, Futurism in Italy, Suprematism and Rayonnism in Russia, Expressionism and later Bauhaus in Germany; all countries on an idealistic mission to represent modern reality.  No shift such as this had been known in thought and art since the Renaissance.

————	————	————	————	————	————


1.Analytical cubism breaks the object down into the various perspectives of the object and has a periodical syntax; 2. Synthetic Cubism fractures the object down into the component aspects of its objective state and uses a divisional syntax.
 Analytical Cubism retells the story of the object and Synthetic Cubism reconstitutes the object.  Therefore, the second is a synthesis whereby the first is an analysis.  Analytical Cubism is an analysis and is temporal; Synthetic Cubism is a synthesis and is spatial [textural].

Analytic Cubism: the painter makes an analysis of the object, recording many different perspectival
   'takes' or 'viewings' on/of the object [periodical syntax]. Time is of the essence [temporal].

   Synthetic Cubism: the painter makes a synthesis of the object whereby he breaks down the object
   into the component aspects of its objective nature and reconstitutes it, modified, modulated,
   manipulated [divisional syntax]. Space is of the essence [textural].

Talking about cubism and how it is part of Kant’s system, Conceptual art is the idea part of pure reason; cubism is the analytic of conceptions, Renaissance painting is the analytic of principles, Transcendental Aesthetic is Realism and Impressionism, Kinetic Art… Transcendental logic influenced phenomenologists who in turn touched art history directly.  Transcendental dialectic is post-modernism.  We are in an age of the development of the transcendental doctrine of method.  The system is closing.  We are prepared to move onto newer things. 

A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
