Lexicon of Art History concepts and terms:
08/07/01 3:05:00 PM
***
A)
Abstraction, Abstractionism, & Abstract Expressionism:
	An abstraction is a purifying process.  To abstract is to negotiate a new form for an old object.  Abstract Expressionism is a school of abstractionists, namely those that drip and spray paint on the canvas to capture chaos and abstract emotions, to catch it all in the inner workings, your hand in the mechanics of existence dabbing paint violently: the birth of the action painters.  Jackson Pollock is the archetype.  Abstractionism is an idea in metaphysics or aesthetics, basically idealism in metaphysics or modernism in aesthetics (abstract expressionism).  Abstract Expressionism is strong in Color and pseudo-absent in Figure if it is a pure abstraction.  It comes after the few first decades of Surrealism.  Surrealism, in fact, is one of Abstract Expressionism’s very roots.  It is a sort of Romanticism of Color and Form.  Forms are chaotic, broken, swirls and vortices are apparent.  It is a sort of lenience towards expression, a complete innocence towards creation.  All hail the chorus of flies: “Existentialism and mysticism figure in Abstract Expressionism.”

Aesthetic:
	An aesthetic is a sense of what is acceptable in a particular art.  It is the experience the art work makes possible.  It comes from the Greek aisthánesthai, to perceive.  Perception is always involved in aesthetics.  Usually a Metaphysic works in conjunction to an Aesthetic, making it a more viable reality.  Some say Aesthetics is the study of what we call beauty or perfection of form in art.  Some say it’s the feelings and thoughts aroused by the work of art.  It is both of these, plus a third sense: the sense of the phenomenology of objects.

Keywords:
=>Presence	=>Tone		=>Quality 	=>Proportion
=>Perception	=>the Beautiful	=>Idea		=>Theory
=>Vision

Analytic:
	An analytic is important to art history because art history breaks down into two sides: analytical and synthetic, in the same way as Kant’s ‘Critique of Judgment’ bifurcates.  Edmund Husserl speaks of formal analytics as the theory of science in ‘Formal and Transcendental Logic’.  Analytics to us, purely formal analytics, is our way of attaining purified conceptuality, a way of reducing things to purity of forms, and resembles an Aesthetic.  An Analytic, though, spelt without the s, relates to Analytical Cubism, say, an analytic is a theory of science, an analytic is also a purified form of mind transcript, script of events happening, the pen that intervenes; an analytic is a critique, a critique is an essay, an essay is historical writing, therefore an analytic is historical writing.  By this we mean historical writing in the sense that identifying concepts and following their paths can be a sort of history; we believe that when assumptions are held on space and time, many histories inevitably follow.  But the important thing to remember is analytical cubism and synthetic cubism, two important schools of thought to be discussed under Cubism.
***
B)
Background:
Bauhaus:
***
C)
Categories:
Concepts:
Cubism:
D)
Da Vinci, Leonardo:
	The perfect Renaissance man.  A regular jack of all trades.  
Dialectic:
	=>
De Stijl:
Delacroix:
E)
Emotion:
Existentialism:
Experience:
Expressionism:
F)
Foreground:
Form:
G)
H)
I)
Incipience:
Intuition:
J)
K)
Kafka:
L)
Logic:
M)
Metaphysic:
N)
O)
P)
Perspective:
Picasso:
Proportion:
Q)
R)
S)
Surrealism:
T)
Theory:
U)
V)
Valence:
Value:
Vorticism:
W)
X)
Y)
Z)
