Metaphysic of Art Movements II:
07/14/02 9:24:38 PM
***
	I
	…



Aesthetic, Dialectic, Rhetoric, Logic, Ethic, Metaphysic, Mechanic, Analytic, Synthetic, Technicity, Historicity, Facticity, 
Technique & Technology, Theory & Practise, Appearance, Phenomena, Presence / Absence, order, series, movement, change, the circulation of ideas coexistentially + the progression and retrogression and oblique movement of ideas over time – thought, preparation, creation, exhibition, viewing & criticism [observation].  Question and answer, the fugue form.  The form of philosophical dialogues, therefore the logical forms of the calculus [Mathematic].  These all operate on different levels.  The Dialectic is evident in each separation.  Aesthetic as foundational plane.  Ethic as rules of programmation or mobility.  Try to see Ethic as formality, as rules of formation like in Foucault, except they are limits, regularities, laws.  Technique and Technology have a correspondent relationship.  There is communication in all of this, art history is expressive, art is expressive.  There are polarities, several different polarities per item which help to define the thing, the singularity.  A singularity becomes a meeting of two lines, or the meeting of infinite vectors, yet it is also the space defined by encircling ellipses, like Lana’s rubber bands.


Leibniz, Borges, calculus and the Garden of Forking Paths:
	[essay on incompossibility, on possible words, get the Eco essay, read Deleuze on Leibniz, read the Theodicy, read Borges’ Garden of forking paths, study calculus, and compose a Baroque piece, a sort of propositional calculus, narrative, theoretical, elucidating that great area called serial theory - find recent serial theorists]
	[must absolutely acquire a copy of Maurice Leblanc’s La vie extravagante de Balthazar (Paris: Livre de Poche, 1979) - + Eco on counterfeit + Gide’s Les Faux-Monnayeurs to make a very full piece as much on the philosophy of Leibniz and the debt it has created modern writers and serial theorists as it is a literary analysis of modernist texts using ideas taken from calculus.  It mixes mathematics, philosophy, and literary theory (literary analysis).  This will help me attain my interdisciplinarity, which in the end will be philosophy (logic, metaphysics), mathematics, and art history (for I will tackle history through art movements, through visual art created in art movements, and describe the fraudulence, the counterfeitism, the convergence and divergence of infinite series, game theory, etc. - metaphysic of art movements + game theory and serial theory = art history, philosophy, mathematics.)]
The Oval and the Baroque - an example of the Metaphysic of Art Movements.  Show how Romanticism reacts to Enlightenment, how painting can be seen as an infinite series, how movements are short series of paintings that can have points at various periods, look at the wave + the ellipsis, learn the mathematical language to speak and make diagrams of these concepts, ellipsis, sine wave, vectors, etc.
Show how modernism and post-modernism make a certain ellipsis, them delimit a zone with two temporal limits that are focal points, or two temporal approximations of limits, because it actually converges on the limit, it never reaches the limit [I think this is what convergence is].  We could say that modernism converges on the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, or that Romanticism converges on the French Revolution.  It never begins exactly at the French Revolution, but converges.  This is the dialectical method which I call the Metaphysical method in art history.  You define something by multiple layerings of loops or ellipses.  They are spectra, actually.  You can look at Cubism as various spectra, too.  Objectively, materially, it has a wide range, it has degrees of magnitude, degrees of color intensity, degrees of linearity and coexistentiality.  Read Wolflin, learn his dialectics.
Series of paintings in time, groups of artists in time and space with their thoughts, their relations, their actions, multiplicity upon multiplicity forming a system with no integral governance.  It is in nowise static.  Non-static, elastic actually.  It is elastic, elastic zones like colonialism / post-colonialism, Analytic Cubism / Synthetic Cubism.  But there are also tripletarities, triplaries, polarities with countless focal points.  In Paris during the early 20th century, certain sites are focal points, certain institutions; there are certain exigencies about which turn a mechanic of events.  Exhibitions take place around the Salons, around Galleries, in Cafés, etc.  I must write about the political implications, a whole other level on which things take place, a Politic, so that we have:
Aesthetic	Metaphysic 	Politic		Ethic	Rhetoric	Logic		Epistemic	Dialectic 
Mechanic	Dialectic	Analytic	Technic

The Technic and Mechanic have to do with creation.  The Technic involves the Mechanic of Creation.  The Mechanic also enters into the Ethic, which is a Mechanic itself, enters into Politic, Rhetoric, and the Metaphysic itself.  Logic is like the Mechanic of the Analytic.  The Aesthetic is the Ethic of Technic.  Politic is [relations] the Logic of Dialectic.  Rhetoric is a Politic of Mechanics.

Metaphysic, to me, is an Aesthetic which is the Ethic of Technic, an Ethic is a Mechanic, Technic is a Mechanic of the Historic / Factic, the Mechanic is, the Historic [Ontologic] is a Metaphysic, a Logic is a Mechanic of the Analytic,

07/14/02 11:27:13 PM - I want to inspect the surface and the integrity of this problem: how mathematics, philosophy, and history can work together.  I have chosen to use art history instead of history because today it includes semiological studies of pictorial language, and there is a fine line between geometry, respective to mathematics, and certain line drawings, or even just plain linear perspective drawing.  The map comes into this too.  The Cartesian plane, basically, is an area that I want to study, how his plane came about.  What is mathematics or philosophy?  Are the first plane geometry demonstrations of algebraic expressions merely mathematical?  I say no because there is a translation involved from arithmetic to algebra, from algebra to geometry.  Calculus also is a certain focal point of different forces.  If you think of advances in the history of mathematics, you can surely see the play of art, for the geometric plane in mathematics has an aesthetic, so do algebraic expressions, but the translation onto a plane shows the versatility of the language of mathematics, and brings out its linguisticness, and in the possibilities that the Cartesian plane brings about have much to do with pictorial language.  From philosophy I will inevitably treat Logic.  Not unlike Deleuze, I want to look at Logic and Aesthetics.  I want to see history as a set of problems and resolutions, and irresoluble problems, or open problematics.  Mathematics is about solutions, and this is where it gets historical for me.  Also, the applicability of mathematics; mathematics translates in another way, into concrete examples in the physical world.  Think of serial theory, of game theory.  They have applications to a wide variety of phenomena.  One of them, I think, and one that I have not seen treated, is art history.  Art is one of my passions.  Music also.  And so I am very much compelled to undertake a historical project that seeks to untangle the mess of aesthetic, mathematical, and philosophical problems.  I want to look at certain points, or focal points, we can call them.  They are nodes.  It is up to the writer or thinker to come up with his/her own nodes.  Depending on how I want to look at a point or series of points in history, certain trajectories, etc., I will choose appropriate limits and an appropriate framework.  I would not look at a moment and find its mathematical, aesthetic, and philosophic constructs.  No.  I will look at a series of mathematical developments and then treat an entirely different series of aesthetic developments.  I will look at theories and at methods, strategies.  One segment that I want to look at is well into the modern period.  It is 1888-1924.  Another is 1900-1950, 1850-1950.  Depending on what I am looking at, the period might be short or long.  I want to look at the year 1811 and also the year 1911 and compare them.  In 1811, Beethoven and Goethe exchanged letters.  In 1911, Picasso and Braque exchanged possible solutions to aesthetic problems.  In all of this, I will string a sociological commentary.  I want to be very methodical about this.  It is important that I can work exclusively in the different domains.  Then after I have looked at a mathematical, a philosophical, and an aesthetic series of developments, I will write a commentary that finds possible relations, similarities, regularities, boundaries.  In the end there will be problems that flow through all three fields.  Others may not.  Some problems may not be problems that existed at the time I am studied, but that appear later on, but that could have easily taken shape at that time had some possible thing taken place.  For this project I need to teach myself a lot of mathematics.  Ideally I would know game theory through and through, also serial theory, differential and integral calculus, algebra and all its new developments, trigonometry, geometry, chaos theory [very important because it is the speciality of modern mathematics].  I want to talk about problems in general, puzzles, and the various logics that come out of them.  Theory is something that I want to write a great deal about.  These will take the shape of short essays, that is the only way to do it.  Short chapters, if you will, of a never-ending project.  It would be nice to begin it as soon as possible.  I can outline here several possible points of entry:
	Descartes, the Cartesian plane, cogito ergo sum, subjectivity, the scientific method - Leibniz, monadology, incompossibility, possible worlds, the calculus - in Aesthetics, theories from the Renaissance on perspective, on form, on color [Goethe too later on in the Classical period] - the Baroque period in music, in art, in architecture, and in mathematics and philosophy [a meeting-place of all worlds] - modernism and aesthetics, the anaesthetic - materialism and art, the problem of materialism in philosophy and art - analysis of intensity in sound, color, as a philosophical concept [intensity requires philosophy and mathematics, and also finds application in aesthetic practises] - there are formal problems that I must deal with in art, poetic forms, rhetorical forms, and then the subject position in painting - in the end I will focus on painting, philosophy, and mathematics as ways of explaining the world, as domains of observation and speculation -
	The concept of Realism in painting, in philosophy, and the problem of reality in mathematics where many things seem to exist on an absolute plane - Realism and how it rears its dirty face into the 20th century - phenomenology and existentialism, reality, existence, actuality, history - stratification in history, stratification in philosophy [archaeology + geology] - layers in mathematics, dimensions [we almost get into theoretical physics here] - What I need is a research team here, people from all quarters of research - Impressionism, Light, representation, perception, temporality - if the Impressionists were trying to represent the play of light, of atmosphere, this says a lot about the historical period, Gide writing his first works, his Impressionist narratives, and in music, Ravel, Debussy, etc., which reaches the saturation point of Expressionism in Satie which mixes in with Picasso and passion, emotion, tension, anxiety, the modern world, the city vs. the pastoral, the aesthetic of the city, blocks, edges - David Hilbert’s problems at the turn of the 20th century, Einstein’s theories of relativity, relativism in philosophy, Cubism in art - Fauvism and the beastly, Nietzsche and the monstrous reality of the human condition - Fauvism and distortions of color, of tone and chroma - the problem of Cubism is not dissimilar to the problem of phenomenology, look closely at Heidegger’s logical progression, you’ll see - Constructivism in art and mathematics, in philosophy -
	Pop Art and the Industrial Revolution, the post-industrial - popular art, popular culture, image, replica and original, counterfeit in art - reversals, substitutions, translations, distortions - particular works that show elements of art, philosophy, and mathematics working together in the piece, or the oeuvre, like Descartes, for instance, or Cubism, where the boundaries blur - Surrealism and psychiatry, psychoanalysis, automatic writing and painting, the aleatory in music, chaos theory in physics and mathematics, chance and probability - 
  
A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
