SURREALISM:
05/02/01 11:55:35 PM
***
	Preview:
	Surrealism.  Automatism.  Sigmund Freud, Carl Jung, Psychology.  Mythology.  What is art?  What are the concepts of art history?  I will attempt to write the concepts of art history and how we progress through them in the mind.  I will stop at Surrealism, that’s how this essay got its title.  I will follow my own consciousness, the path of all the concepts of art history from the most primitive art forms to Surrealism.  I chose Surrealism as the style of my essay because it alone allowed me to show the progression of the concepts of art history in my mind, which is the new way of looking at art history.
	We need to look at art history in a new way, the edges have become blurred.  We no longer know when Surrealism started.  We need to readjust the monitor and see what is what.  We should take art history concepts, the most primitive ones, and lay them against newer concepts.  As we go alongside history we will see how the concepts of art history evolved.  
	Today we are at Conceptual/Post-Modernist art.  This art holds the analytical side of cubism and surrealism with the modernist symbolic flavor, concepts become symbols become elements from dream, become the eyes glazed over of the dreaming wanderer in the modern city…
	Paul Guimard, Jorge Luis Borges… Mirror Reflections, the water’s surface, the moon… Picasso has surrealist works except he stuck with the ingenuity of childhood scribbles whereas Dali stuck with the unconscious shapes being manifested on canvas in ultra-precision Deuteronomy.
	I made an icon, the Tonal Cinema, where Surrealism is in the Vapors/Abysms section, Cubism is in the Projector/Projectionist section.  This Tonal Cinema will be seen and related to the historical science of art in mens, in the mind of the operator of its machinery.

	Origin and Evolution of Religions from the Animistic [mythological] system:
	Religion is one of humanity’s deepest dream/reality systems.  What I did in this essay is substitute Religions with the concepts of art history and replace the animistic system with Tonal Cinema.  What we will have afterward is a historical materialist scientific negotiation/translation of human events into the terms of a cognitive understanding of art and its historicity, how it translates in human consciousness, into an internal language of the arts and the person, the individual.  Really we are paving the way for new modes of thought.
	The concept of Art:
	The concept of art.  It occurred to me to teach art history in a new fashion, in the way of cognitive science, of the intellect and how the concepts of art history react to one another inside the mind.  I’m not as idealistic as Kant, I don’t want to outline the entire system, just the main concepts of art history and show you how to look for new ways of looking at things, at art, at history.
	There exists a chronology in art.  There’s an entire history, 20 000 years of it.  Religion has a similar history, maybe even ranging more widely.  We are investigating new systems.  I mentioned Religion, our art history concept such as aesthetic [art history borrows from other sciences], language.  One of the first concepts of art is language.  You have the doer of the act, the actor, the being with the events and objects at hand performing an art trick.  It is a vomitous process, churning from the stomach, Chi, forming a unity with art and the netherworld: in early man, art was not separate from experience, from vision, from dreams.  We had a primordial concept, one unique concept of art and existence.  The lifestyle was religious, consisted of excursions and rites, baptisms.  If we begin with art as the concept, art as objectification.  That is how this theory becomes metaphysical and a form of historical materialism.

Modernism [inversion 1 : a reversal of position, order, form, or relationship; conversion 1 : the act of converting : the process of being converted -- 2 : an experience associated with a definite and decisive adoption of religion]
Surrealism = immersion: an act of immersing : a state of being immersed; specifically : baptism by complete submersion of the person in water; submersion: to submerge.  The act of submerging the act of creating, of submerging into the unconscious, of submerging into action, the state of being immersed, the aesthetic and the perspective, the emotion.
Tonal Cinema => add Tonal System, make it cinematic; cinema = screen, audience, projector, projectionist; Tonal means that it has a scale, steps, a wheel or cycle, a reel, levels on the ladder: a length that has cuts in it, frames.  A system of notes, nodes, modes in relation to each other.
Tonal cinema & Surrealism:
	When we look at Surrealism, we are seeing the Vapors/Abysms section of the Tonal Cinema cipher.  Tonal Cinema, when seen from the side, is composed of a Projector/Projectionist section, a Vapors and Abysms section, and a Screen/Exhibition section.  See it as an old cinema house.  Upstairs is the projector with the projectionist operating the equipment.  In art the projectionist is the artist.  In surrealism, we have the Audience section, called here Vapors/Abysms because of the light of the projection overhead and the abyss of the audience sitting in the darkness.  The Audience is important, it is the eye of the spellbound movie-watcher, it is Reflection, it is the abyss Da’ath and identity.  It is a mystic’s oneness and twoness deep underwater in the abysm silent whispering shadows in the mirk moving towards the Light.  The surrealist movie is one of the unconscious.  See Hitchcock’s ‘Spellbound’.
	
	Sociological essay on historical materialism in Quebec:
Marx & Quebec:
	It appears to me that in the year 2001 already in Quebec we are seeing a rise in the ideas of Marx, but an actual historical fact that the ideas are reaching young Quebec heroes, cultural figures, painters, poets, musicians.  His ideas are existing now as we play out the steps of Das Kapital in our multinational capitalist economic system.
	Linguistic contagion:
	Take note of spontaneous linguistic formations that are contagious in their appeal to the mouth that say the phrases.  The economics of fashion.  There are linguistic patterns that can be passed on, oftentimes in the form of jokes or politically incorrectednesses.  We see the motion of the humors of the human body as a whole organ of society.  We see the communal unconscious projecting its dreams on the streets of Florida.
	Behavioral pattern contagion:
	Beware of negative behavioral patterns that are contagious.  In art, they are necessary, it is how the artist learns his trade.  By watching visages and people in motion, in the commotion of daily life.  By watching, the voyeuristic scientist learns the motions of the human soul.  It reverberates inside him, is embedded deep in the unconscious.
	OCD and the Object:
	Touching.  Textures.  The object of obsession.  Wish fulfilment makes us reach out, projection too.  Touch more.  Touch it again.  The rhythms of existence, caught under a wave.  The complex of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder is that of an integrated motion of the spheres of knowledge Pain and Pleasure, physical knowledge, sense perception.  One is comforted by being guilty of touching the untouchable.  What you now accomplished in art was not possible before you had gone through a certain ritual of practise.  
	The object and religion:
	The object of worship.  The shrine, the altar.  Covet not thy neighbor’s etc.  We envy, want, strive for, deserve, relinquish the religious object.  We need the power it gives, the sense of security.  A religion is a healthy psychosis.  It goes with the theory of the Meta-Brain.  The Meta-Brain is when all the visible planes converge and form a matrix visually, as though a grid were added to the visually manifest, and the sufferer of the Meta-Brain spasm envisions that all is interrelated and finds a system of connection between all events perceptible.  This Meta-Science is an area of intimate knowledge of experience.  Once you have had the Meta-Brain Psychosis, the Vision of Illumination, do you know the theories of historical materialism as Translation.
	The object and art:
	We have both the object of obsession and the object of worship.  Here, in art, we have the aesthetic object: the image appears as an attractor, it attracts the audience’s attention.  Object of control, object of economic value, a commodity.  More about Translation.
	We are taking the normal everyday experiencing and translating it into the language of art.  The everyday experience encompasses art’s aesthetic plane.  The plane of aesthetics in art has to do with the experience of viewing the art object, an experience that is voyeuristic.  We are speaking of painting mostly.  Film also.  This is why we have crafted the science of Tonal Cinema, to mix obsession with numbers with mysticism and modernist concepts as a form of translation of daily experience.
	Television, Mass audience:
	Audiences are petrified, scared by the gigantic machine that is the cinema screen.  It shouts at them, barks up images, signs, icons, prototypes, stereotypes, unconscious elements, products of capitalism, and we eat it, we are stupefied, bewildered by the flashing lights.
	We catch them on the bus, we see the logos, the insignias.  We see the genius of marketing.  We see assemblies of images in the photomontage that is our daily lives.  The problem of a mass audience is that it erases individuality.  It makes corporate decisions.  The individual experience is erased and replaced with the corporate stereotype.
	Amplification/Projection [Totem and Taboo]:
	When we become one we lose the other, the you, and we are lonely together.  Such is the case with the object of art.  It projects the artist into a new chain of experiences because he or she needs to fix the problem.  Art is always problematic.  It is deeply involved in the problematic of its existence.  Art and Time work together as concepts.  Note the intimateness of their involvement.

The Tonal System is detailed in the ‘Exhibition in Tonal Cinema’, of 16 volumes.
Creative writing + Art history = historical materialism + construction

The Construction of concepts:
In art we commence with the concept of art.  Art is merely an object/thing created with an aesthetic whose material survives after the act, is looked upon with miraculousness or passion or fear, and with ceremoniousness we cultivate the trade of making/building the object/thing with a Design, a Plan.
Will is involved and with will is inevitably fear and passion.  In the realm of art history, we’ll stick to definitions of the concepts of art history.  With the concept of art, we can add Geography, both the geographical location of the piece if it is in rock or if it is hung in a museum, and the Geography of the event of creation of the art piece and its adoration afterwards.  To the concept of art we have a tradition, a cultural experience.  Art is taught.  It can be auto-disciplinary, auto-didactic can the artist him or herself spontaneously become.
Over time we can extend the concept to a system of concepts.  Art history is a system of concepts that work together.  They include things such as Cubism and Phenomenology, Light, the Eye, and Projection.  It is a multidisciplinary science.
We have already added Time to Art.  What makes it?  It means that the object of art exists afterwards in the realm of existence in the physical realm.  We add the power over memory that makes man modern.  When fire became portable, the fire began to burn in the human watcher, eyes wide perceiving a change in human consciousness.  Art became something to die for.

	The architect:
	A dreamer.  A developer like the aged Faust.  We have a movement in modernism from the 1870s onward till World War I, then after World War II another one.  In 2001, we are experiencing the third movement of modernism.  The architects are always the firsts to notice this. 
I believe that architects are at the avant-garde of movements in politics, art, science.  I believe this because architects, in building, in constructing actual objects of development, historical objects, they are at the forefront before the construction, they are the ones who devise the plan, the lay-out, they form the outline of the science the art the politics etc. of the moments that follow them. 
	There are two schools of Surrealism: Automatism and Veristic Surrealism.

	FAUVISM 1903—1907
	Fauvism took place a good distance before Surrealism.  It was a movement about color.  Lots of color.  Expressionism is what connects Fauvism, Surrealism, and Abstract Expressionism.  The colors of Fauvism were in vogue in the reign of Surrealism.
In the manner that Futurism, Constructivism, and DeStijl all followed the main trend of Cubist theory and practise, some surrealists are more cerebral, which makes an appeal to the cubist aesthetic of the Intellect, of science.  Dali has been known to paint anatomical sequences, concepts of physics. 
	We are throwing concepts in the air.  We need to revalue all the movements/concepts of art history.  The Pre-Raphaelites were a group of pretty much symbolists plain and simple.  The Surrealists have a brand of the gimmick of Romanticism.  The rhetorical figures of the age of French Symbolism, borrowed through countless readings of the giants of that time.  Rimbaud, an unclassifiable lad, is the invisible leader of surrealism.  He leads through the past.  A vagrant trumpeteer.

SURREALISM IS A GENETIC MEASURE OF CAUSTIC SPATIALITY,
an organism of projection that broadcasts the old hopes of a past a historical cycle of taboo…

	In surrealism, when the unconscious is uncovered, there is an iconology.  Iconology is the study of icons or artistic symbolism.  From the deep chasm of the unconscious, the shapes of our consciousness and life and dream realities surface.
	“To them [classical philosophers] the word techné embraced both the fine arts and the useful arts and was applied to the knowledge and study of the certain and inevitable rules of the craft.”—p.4 Poetics of Music, Stravinsky.
	Perishable things.  Aristotle comes from the great beyond with a word play.  He will put grime on the greasy fingers of oily time.  Only grit will clean it out.  Time, space, the universe, everything in disarray.  The untimely demise of the old ghost tells us what trickster tales and surrealism have in common.  The surrealist painter is one of those miserly rhetorical wizards.  Let us have a look at this geometrically.

	Part One:
	A dream I had of Aristotle talking about forms in his Metaphysics.  He had a strange mystical rhythm to him, speaking of things after they perish.  Strange man, that Aristotle.  He has a very striking manner and style.  I find he treats his subjects with a distinct method.  I can’t really say I’ve read very much of the Metaphysics, but the dream had some sense to it, I understood the secret behind Aristotle’s texts.  It was a brand of mysticism, elitism, moving away from classic Platonic thought.
	Dreams.  The iconology is the Jungian part of Surrealism.  The Freudian part is more analytical.  You can see the wheel that spun Surrealism spun Abstract Expressionism, just as Cubism spun Futurism, Constructivism and DeStijl.  The object of repetition is that the ideas become clearer.  Forced repetition is a form of sustaining one’s standpoint.  In dream theory, I erected both a Jungian and a Freudian aspect and it helped me understand Surrealism.  This is really about Surrealism and how it exists in my mind.  I’m not going to edit anything I say, I’ll write the flight of my fancy, stream of thought to capture all the material I might that comes from my unconscious.  I will be Automatic.  That’s the way to see the movements of concepts in the mind and to see what the unconscious has to say about it all.



We’re going to see Surrealism as a filter of
perception, an exact experience, aesthetic and
metaphysical.  The embryo of Surrealism was cast in
the late 1800s.  Rimbaud and Baudelaire came
infinitely close to the later ideals of André Breton. 
A sort of French Symbolism gone wild.  Surrealism is
an experience.  I’ve had it.  I would like to explain
my experience of Surrealism.

When an object becomes its negative and then itself
again.  This is primal surrealist activity in the
brain.  Primordially, we are programmed to understand
the stages of surrealism in the mind.  Surrealism
begins with the Other.  The self and the Other.  The
Other then breaks down into Dream, Reality, fragments
of both, of the distances in-between, of objects
qualified as Reflections, Vapors, Fragrances. 
Anything that the mind can clutch onto, anything that
it can grasp a hold of is accepted in this funeral
march.  The surreal is the metallic taste, is delirium
tremens, clutching at bedsheets mad utopic rearward
black-realm of an insane nature.  But the crystalline
seed is held within Surrealism as it clutches to the
unconscious and makes things appear that are so real
they speak to us in an automatic fashion, reaching
deep into us with claws of titanium steel.  Surrealism
is a sublime experience.  A filter of perception is: a
system or mode of thinking that enables the user of
the filter to perceive more than is normally
perceptible.  He adds a filter to his perception and
therefore enables himself to perceive the
existentially manifest with a wider focus.  To speak
of sur-realism, atop the plane of realism, floating
above it as from a chandelier.  It shatters as it hits
the ground.  Hard as a hammer, surrealism is beneath
the moment, stolen of sorts, hidden in the gripping
madness that comes from opening the doors of
perception.  The perceptual filter is used to redirect
information from the senses into the brain in a
complex system, but a new one, a new system of
configuring data for the viscounts of memory, the
brown-robed monks deep in the shadows of our brains. 
Surrealism, you see gentle shapes vague ones on the
surface of a lake, you see swirls and curls and
ambiguous shapes.  Thus the chasm is opened wide, the
mouth of heaven spills the matter of the surrealist
drama.  This is when you are at the forefront of
being, you are the mad-mouth partisan of this wretched
earth, you gambol and swerve on the open streets, all
is an open sea striving to cascade the fox though the
cemetery gates.



What’s left to do?  Surrealism is a network of images,
an internal language, primitive religious tongue,
barbaric resonants in the genetic material.

We take the ship to the netherworld, enter the ancient
city in avarice, hunger, skinny wraiths walking in
meekdom faint and peculiar little wandering fellows, a
fine brand smirking all’a’time, the men of the red
storm, Mars in messagorial transcript, our eyes open
wide to translate the beauty of the pictorial realm. 
This 2-dimensional surface is finely woven with a
clean grid where each object is placed.  It is a
transaction, has a gradient and a range, a period and
dashes toward the infinity of the moment in space,
never ending trails connecting everything, an abstract
geometry covering everything in that light as peculiar
as the wizard of the wild streets of Mexico.  A
disgruntled worker.  Surrealism comes from the ancient
school of wanderers known as Cro-Magnon man.  Hiding
in the caverns at night, the Cro-Magnon cave-painter
displays his magic.  He works with unconscious
ideational patterns as much as the surrealist painter.
 They work on the same plane.
———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———
the rows of books on the shelf of the doctor’s office, old doctor Freud, versus doctor Jung, the iconoclast versus the mystical monk, heroless to heroes, fear to inner depths of the chasm of the human heart.  Gleaming optical instruments in the doctor’s office, carpet on the walls halfway to the ceiling, midwall the carpet stops and a nice bordure de bois sits neatly perched in rightwood discipline.  Between the sections we have the narratives.  These are to show the practical side of surrealist theory.  Creation of images, dream ones.  Conceptual thought on the 2-dimensional plane, the canvas carved with surgical precision à la Dali.  It’s how I began the Exhibition in Tonal Cinema, in the first book, Uncovering the Ungun, I was unveiling the camera, cubism, surrealism, the shadows… the projector came much later as I began with just the crux of surrealist thought and poetry interlaced with one another, in one another, lost, vagrant heroes of the plush of Marsdale, Vulcan the hero, Vulcan the lost, the arid in aged vacancy of moment pondering the imponderables, questioning what is fit in the moment exactly precisely in the fiery pit that’s warm hot fiery that’s the morning moment full and blank and absurd.  In the doctor’s office, I saw the shapes of my unconscious.  Vulcan set low, at a dim setting, sitting on a limb, resetting the settler’s notch on the chair, the news unsettling the chieftain of the cross riverdale cross the western way seizing the story in switching the narrative around, cutting and splicing, the trick of brilliant ingenuity, the human conduit of something sublime, the surrealist shadow a mirk and madness crave-haven.  The candle slim in its idle blankness.  I’m to write a dictionary of Heidegger because I can’t afford the one in the store.
———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———
Part Two:
How this all comes together, I don’t know.  I just know that it does, it has to.  If it doesn’t connect, then I’m not a surrealist.  Veristically, I am.  That’s what I’m trying to treat here, that modern concept of surrealism, how it shines today, now, this moment, the next, the coming, the arriving, saddling the moment, creating within it, in its current, its course.  
Da-sein:
Heidegger comes between Surrealism and Cubism in his ‘Being and Time’.  He shows the exact mark which distinguishes the separate boundaries.  The main feature of surrealism is Projection.  The act of invention through use of the Imagination, the Intellect, all right and proper.  Making dream material manifest in the sphere of the physical.  In the question of being we have the immaculate shadow unveiled in its blank staring-at-walls sadness.  In inimical nakedness, we have the great naked icon beingness.  This part reads as a dream transcript.  We want to elevate the present processes to the level of adaptation through questioning.  We need to access the spirit of surrealism and recreate it in a textbook of surrealist prose, a work that can be opened anywhere and Surrealism is spoken of.  Phenomenologically, surrealism is an event of viewing pictorial material with action in the eyes and brain relating to the material being watched.  
I must quote from one of my novellas.  It’s the only way I have right now to express what the nature of surrealism is on the plane of phenomena.  I will quote a nice chunk of it.  It is from the first novella of a 16 novella set called ‘Exhibition in Tonal Cinema’.  It’s from ‘Uncovering the Ungun’:

“What seest thou else in the dark and backward abysm of time? 
	1937 mythology, 1989 national, cynical sex half-complete artificial body; postmodern minotaur.  The minotaur of the Here, the mythic origins of the bloody aggressiveness.  Death-brilliant anticipations, self-seeking naturalism in the claw itself postmodern on the origin. The sex of new mythologies nail killing, ensnare rites and cultural alterity becomes unfit to the longest point of a degree (part code of the production property).   The knot of a trail to gold mines; where’s the head of a bull as thee for a breast in the parts discomforting?  And disembodied panorama of Paris image, so important to cover for groveling journalists.  Here, the cadaver of the 1936 and the Here-Was of a rising high rids me of impurity, guards me neither in the bomb of dozing bounds a beating tourism, to head, with its bloodied tongue power; it is norms & cultures down. Salvador Dali anticipatory artifacts of a defunct high; my incident with decomposing culture. This is the flesh, the And-Because there into the knife-edge of Dali’s reverie.”

	Heidegger, then.  How does he fit in?  He was transcribing, in Being and Time, the progression of the human spirit in everyday clashing with the Outside realm.  Spatiality grew as a concept from mere space of the objects of this realm of perception to the nearness-at-hand of objects and a spatiality about need and belonging.  Borges comes into play.  Borges is the ringleader, the perfect mystic because we can never truly pin down whether he is a mystic or not.  The same with Heidegger, we can’t know whether he’s a mystic or not, we just go with what we know, that he wrote ambiguous texts.  Ambiguity is the breadth of the works of art of surrealism or is a function in it as an art.

Tonal Cinema as system theory:
We can use text in numerous ways.  The way I’ve come to use it is as a sort of abstract cinema where anything goes.  It gets absurd, goes through philosophy, psychology, through various stages of history, through concepts galore, and comes back to this central thesis of the operation being taken care of, as Heidegger might say, and this operation is a systematisation of the whole of my literary experience, split up into a million shards, molded together to form the gelatinous hunk that is my eye, my vision, my republic of nonsense recreated in a park in my imagination, a great park with wooded areas, a visionary realm of poetics and rhetorical perfection, harmony glittering unsullied most fashionable existence.
It’s also a form of Veristic Surrealism.  A surrealism of the now.  A great Psyche’s Show of kaleidoscopic splendor.  We use a mathematical procedure.  A sort of translation of what is phenomenologically present.  Near-at-handness of everything perceptible.  It’s elective of a general manipulation of that data, a form of consciousness of manipulation of information.  Never let people become concepts.  People are real creatures, alive and responsive.  Merely give them a statement of how you feel.
The theory sounds tantalizing.  A Tonal Cinema.  A house for spiritual, rhetorical, and poetical freedom.  A cinema house with films on linguistics.  Elementary visual courses, a whole filmic educational system.  Monitors at every student’s head revelling behind the flash of the images.
Surrealism is near-to-hand.  It’s impressive how important a flight towards the center of the global moment Surrealism has taken.  A new interest has been sparked.  Borges was a surrealist, we could say.  He wrote ambiguous texts, interpretative texts, narratives of critical analysis.  These could easily be manifestos for surrealism.  Poe as well was an early foreboding of surrealism to come.  H.P. Lovecraft, all the short story writers.  It seems that through short stories we can find surrealism in all its light.
Art history follows a similar path conceptually that music history and literature follow.  Rhetoric follows the same path in the mind when you start in each separate science with the simplest concept.  When you begin learning something, an orb of knowledge, the experience of continuous learning is an experience of art, of the trade, of craftsmanship, and extends to all the spheres of knowledge, can be used to portray the historical moment in all its blaring evidence.  In the mind, in the realm of cognition, the experience of adding concept to concept to form a system is one single universal experience: learning.  With passion we form a vibrant memorable experience and this forms the sustenance of our creative cycle.  Wisdom comes from the submergence into the field of learning for a sustained period of time.
The fine line between dream and reality is crossed.  We no longer know where we are except that we are.  History has closed its eyes for the first time.  We are in an age of invisibility.  We are a closed system with no way out, the seeker’s new realm of unconsciousness and sublime disorders.  Sublime disorders are disorders linked with fear and nausea.  We are living in the age of Fevers and Plagues.

	We have a definite experience in surrealism.  An aesthetic of silence and the rush of the waterfall.  Noise sequences in the republic of science.  I’m telling you, the first thing that comes up to mind in the study of art history is the concept of art itself.  What is art?  Art is the close study of everyday experience.  What is the second concept of art?  It is that the experience can become a trade.  Trade lives closely with the concept of commodities.  The third concept of art is that art is a commodity itself.  Art is both the concept of art as a trade, as a craft, and the concept of art as a product of the craft.
	The fourth concept of art would then be that there exists the artist and his craft/product.  The next concept is that between him and his art there exists a system of relationships that must be studied if he is to excel in his art.  Teleology is my science.  Tonal Cinema, to the highest degree!  Highest proximatism!
What is Tonal Cinema?  What is ‘proximate’?  Latin proximatus, past participle of proximare, to approach, from proximus, nearest, next… it means, according to Merriam-Wesbter, “immediately preceding or following (as in a chain of events, causes, or effects)”.  So what immediately precedes this?  The orientation of this project is to tell what surrealism is and can be in the moment.  Ah, it sounds awful, I know, it sounds like some sort of rhetorical twist or trick.  I’m merely trying to pin down what is happening in the moment that I say, “This is art.”  In that moment, I have taken a thing, an object, and made it an object of art.  This has expanded the regions where the object works.  I have identified a new realm whereby the object can exist, the realm of art.  In Tonal Cinema, the object IS the art.  Each individual that works as hard as I have to find the meaning of anything IS an engineer of cinema, the tonal cinema that exists in the shadows, the one that scares us, the one that lingers as smoke deep into the wooded areas of experience.  You tackle it and what do you get?  You get a whole series of individual concepts.  They work together and you formulate a vehicle of art whereby different styles can come into communication with other particular styles.  All is in connection.  All is supplying us with an index.
How did we come from surrealism to the index?  The index is simply what the autobiographical textbook offers to the reader of this silent cinema.  We have the main structure and it lines up as so:

	1)Surrealism is a form of art
	2)It is when the lines between art and life become vague, art becomes life, life becomes art in a sort of eclectic communion.  Tonal Cinema is the name that I have given to the science of poetry of the moment.  When I lay down after a hard day’s work and I say, “Ah, all this work, all this evidence of the structures of what is for real…” I have created a landslide.  The virtual textbook is opened.

	I have taken exact liberties of the reader to express how surrealism exists as an aesthetic.  It’s the reflections module.  It is how text is expressed in the phrases of a hard-working mind.  After a long day, the phrases of poetry that come out of a surrealist poet, these are all the evidence necessary to exult in knowing that we have been detained to read something that is worth our while, something that textually might not be Kant or Heidegger, but it might be some sort of something that makes an abstract sense, so keep going…
	We have a definite program of movement.  This means that we are entertaining the wheelworks of an intimate cognition of beingness.  Heidegger was right, go  back to the question of being.  Being in a landslide, how does one complete the phrases that one has started?
	Surrealism is the movement of art in the shadows of the mind, in its operations, in its movement from plane to plane, surface to surface.  What has made the surface important?  Modern art is concerned with the infinitude of this: the surface.  What can surrealism tell us about this subject?
	Turn to the first page of a textbook of the philosophy of surrealism.  This might as well be the first page, it doesn’t matter, it’s not a book you read entirely, it’s only something you grasp in the moment, a slice that passes by your eyes and makes you think for an instant.
	When we look at the surface, we see moving objects.  Objects literally move across the page.  How is this done?  This is done by the use of ambiguity as a figure.  The rhetorical figure of ambiguity, otherwise known as enigma.  Related figures are noema, schematismus, allegory, and paradox.  This is the hardware of the philosophy of surrealism in the human mind.  Surface and conversion.  How does the surface meet a conversion?  It does this by being made into a work of art.  Before being a work of art, the surface is a material for art.  It is converted from mere material to an aesthetic object.  How does this happen?  It’s not a matter of how it happens, more importantly, it is a matter of why and where it happens.  It happens on the page, he tells me.  My friend tells me that when he looks at a piece of work by Dali, it’s as though things are moving on the page.  I look one second at two nuns and then I’m looking at a bust of Voltaire.  It’s what Freud called sublimation, isn’t it?  I’m horribly confused, move onto the next part.  I’m going from experience, I’m working with a strange compilation of historical fact and imaginative/creative material.
———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———	———
	Part three:
	Projection of what materials?  We have gone from the realm of historical materialism to the realm of, “What the hell am I to do with this object if I am a painter and need to learn about surrealism?”  Spatter paint onto a canvas.  Take a new leaf, a clear, unsullied sheet of paper and spray colored water onto it.  The shape of the spots on the paper will tell you what you need to know.  Whether they form a concept or an idea, I don’t know.  You have to take it to that level if you want to.  All I am saying is that by merely dropping a few specks of paint onto a canvas, you can see how the air reacted in that particular moment to the drying of paint.  Was there lots of air, was there little?  I can’t express it, when you will come to this platform, when you will take out a piece of paper and drop a drop of ink on it, you will tell me where we are going, you will tell me what we are doing with art and surrealism.
	Projection in surrealism is the projection of the ink blot right back at you.  You stare into the ink blot, you’re doing the test, and you’re seeing nothing.  All you see is spilled ink.  What shape does it make in your mind?  What realms of consciousness does it touch?  Surrealism, we can say, came into play in the 1920s.  In the middle of the 1920s, surrealism took the car for a spin but never came back.  Who do you believe?  Who is telling the truth about surrealism, the textbook writers?  Only if the textbook is lexical and inter-referential.  That way you can open it anywhere and get a transcript of where art is at the moment, where surrealism is as it chews on old dust and ashes.  Surrealism won’t let us in, we had to settle with its younger brother, THE IMAGE.  What does the image mean?
	The image.  The object.  The page.  I agree, this is a slow process.  We are taking it slowly through each generation of the object of the thesis.  First we have art, then we have surrealism somehow, and now we are questioning how the image reacts with me the viewer.  When I look at a painting by one of the many surrealist, I am left with questions.  This is a common fact in art history.  How can you not be tantalized by these geniuses of manipulation of data?  Anyone in their right mind wants to know what Marx was cooking up with a spoon when he smoked crack for the first time.  That was a joke.
	In Surrealism, the image exists in the same place a figure exists in rhetoric.  The sphere of cognition?  Sort of.  Images come up to the surface and fall back away into the background while I look at objects of surrealist art.  The image, what is the image?
	I am looking at a piece of surrealist art.  I see an image.  How did I do that?  How did I see an image?  I won’t go into the physics of light and the biology of the eye, but I will say this: the image is not what it seems.  That’s the first rule of surrealism.  Surrealist textbooks should read like a rule-book of abstract terms of psychology.  First term: the unconscious.

	The unconscious and surrealism.  Put it off for later.  That’s all you can ever do, procrastinate.  When philosophers begin their great new endeavors into the art of coaxing people, they start by stating the main thesis of their work and then the rest of the work is a sequence of putting it off till later.  You say the main thesis then you say “but before we can assail this subject, we need to do this and this and this…”  That’s human nature and we have to accept it.  Put it off till some other time, you’ll feel better.
	The journals of the counterfeiters.  Gide comes to mind because he was an artist’s philosopher.  He wrote the Counterfeiters which also stands as a sort of pinnacle on which both cubism and surrealism can be built.  Right there on the apex of the moment where it curves inward like a wave.  The tide’s rising, we must meet the boy at the cemetery gate.  The boy from the cemetery is a messenger.  He relays messages between you and I, through the various planes of the moment of existence.  He swims through information.
	Would it be art if I just signed my name?  I am the hidden ghost of a thousand short stories, I am the lava that leaks from the plants at night, the larvae who in a great becoming flourish and flutter.  Would it be art if it creaked in the floorboards at night on a cold winter one?  I don’t really care for anything but a strange transmigratory procrastination.  I am a mystic, aren’t I?  A mystic wouldn’t say that.
	We are experiencing in art today a repositioning of cubism and surrealism, two of the most influential movements of the modern world.  We are basically making new counterfeits, just as the old ones, same in all ways; we create images for the future, for kids to feed on.  The boy from the cemetery comes up and you’ve got shadows all around you.  He lights up and you ask him, “Where do I pick up the book?” and he replies, “You pick it up on Wednesday at the court cinema.”  If such a thing existed, the surrealists would all line up and parade in front of it.  “Long live the cinema of the Crimson King!”  It would have carpet on the walls of a burgundy hue.  Tainted head to foot in blacks, velvet draperies, textures everywhere.  Come to the place where the textures are a cinema of their own.  Come to the Tonal Cinema tonight for a meeting.
	We will meet Linguistics at the mid-point between the fine lines of the Geometry, Rhetoric, and Economic planes.  Mathematics in a dish on a plate at 7 o’clock PM.  Gide is the counterfeiter who slips between the lines of history.  He wrote a journal while he was writing the Counterfeiters.  He published the journals.  He published both a work about a writer writing a work and a work about writing a this work.  He covered all his tracks.  In this way, as infinite trickster, he stands next to the surrealists.
	Naked Venus and the eleven velvet vixens.  We are on a planet spiralling outward into space.  We see the elements pop up onto a sort of imaginary screen, the image, the symbol, this latter being one strong in childhood.  Why is it that childhood memories are so bold, so vibrant, and collide so often with the adult brain that tries to figure it out.  

The Appian Way is an ancient Roman road made of stone connecting the cities of Rome and Brundisium.  What it must have felt like to walk down that road on a rainy night.  What it must have been like to be a Roman wanderer, avoiding plague and pestilence, caught in the moment torn up and projected on the promontory of the imagination.
I wish I had the ink to just make this a picture book.  I’d show you all the ways of the human spirit through time, all its characterizations, all its ephemeral translations, aberrations of spirit and mind.  I shall not be imprisonated, I will study the kinetics and kinematics of the movement of things in the moment.  The object is to keep going because surrealism has still a certain truth to give.  Surrealism will be seen at the summit of a stampede.  In the stony streets at night, the walker walks down the stony path.  He sees the bushes turn into frogs and racoons, he sees elephants and spiders, a fox, a crow deep in the darkness.  A skirmish is propositioned in the outline of the theory.  It’s a sort of number theory, a cycle of unconscious shapes, gentle shapes, harsh shapes, the cutties and the globules all in the same moment.
I would have locomotives in the text.  Or maybe the textual equivalent.  A noise sequence.
Surrealism is the forces of nature warping a sheet of metal.  It is the truth of the unconscious coming through in the moment of creation.  The forces warp the object that you are working on.  In the first steps of creation, the object is forever tainted by the exacting knife of surrealism.  The object becomes its mirror reflection and flips back again.  You see a city underneath the surface of the lake in a green intangible mess.  When the water settles you see your face outlined in black.
We use a sort of filter of perception, we filter out certain things in what we see and we can trace the steps of an imagery that in the context of surrealism as a science is the natural transcript of the spirit over time, an easy equation, the chemical relationships in the body versus the opposing forces of the universe.  Gravity, light, etc. waves of all sort.  Man is particle and wave, material and mode, is of the realm of abstract intelligence.  Much of early surrealism was public revolt.  The Dadaists were revolutionary thinkers.
Veristic surrealism is what will truly mark this new age of civilisation.  We are in the year 2001 at the time of these writings.  History has broken free of its shackles.  By finding rhythmical figures in the movement of objects in space, the absent hero of this play peers into the void of books and finds an ancient answer.  The projector/projectionist is speaker, is agent of the cinema.  He communicates directly to the audience.  It is to his performance that we have honor of.  By gracefulness and gratuity.

Part four:
	Surrealism sits in the middle of the room where the unconscious vortex explodes into action.  The patient sits in the office with his doctor, his psychiatrist, and tells all that he has to tell.  He says it straight through, even looks at picture and tells the doctor what he sees in them.  We are catching a view of the patient as he leaves the office, walking towards the bus.  Another wanderer lost in the transit of life.  He takes the bus and goes off to his wasted watchword land of concepts and deterrents to madness.  All is a puzzle that this idle peon walks through.  He is Alice, he is Prometheus bound to the rock, he IS the rock, the foundation of all that is real.  The desert is hot when the sun comes down.  Prometheus will make it across if it takes an entire lifetime.  We have dream figures punched into the light of day.  We have martial law over everything perceptible, we are in control of the wayward airplane.
	Wayward space as the lines of tears trickle down my face.  I am the lost hero of the story, I am he that makes it to the brand new day.  I will hold fire to my breast and a camera to suffer not the children.  I will digress and make a scene about nothing, then swirl off into empty space with a decathlon of hopes relit and matched up with fate the disassembled member.  Create for myself a new life and a new ponderable quality to seaward motion.  To the heart of the waters, let’s all avalanche there!  We are surgeons of the moment, chroniclers of the true fate of history.
	The vortex is at the heart of the textual landscape.  In the valley, snug, well-fitted into the links of our mission the republic of nonsense.  The textual labyrinth has been opened.  We are set free down the landslide of the moment.  By sprinkling ink on the page, we have sullied it with the genetic material intact, or rather the chemical geography, topology of the moment, the splashing of the waves of perceptual stimuli.  Think of it, matter just sits there to be observed.  If that was my final thesis, I’m astray in muddy straits.
	Surrealism is half this expressionism, the splashing.  The other half in the aesthetic realm is the reflections, the intradimensional pathways, the vortices and whirlpools in the DNA pool.  The vortex is spiritual, is the remnant of a primitive brain.  Surrealism is a science.  You wear the lab-coat and you’re a surgeon.  With surgical precision you work out the rhetorical figures of the moment in history.  In through the web, we find significant points.  Our premises arched under our arms, we battle on the field of action, in the beginning of the moment, though it is always continuous, rarely stops, cycles onward and we meet the exact outline of the science of surrealism.  It is performed here in the textbook setting.

To a new theory of Surrealism, the orb of the story teller, the eye of the projector:
A science, a dialectic:
Surrealism is the shadows and the tissues, silence, science and a farm-owner’s after-meal sit in the grass with the dogs staring at the stars and moon come in to make the evening a blast.  Under the moon he festoons the moment with the blowing of a kiss.
First concept: significant other
Second concept: paralysis of organ of reading
Third concept: misrepresentation of reality, translation
Fourth concept: the shield of Jung and a tribal myth-wheel of unconscious elements, primitive brain, genetic thoughts, thoughts of the chemical moment.
Fifth concept: Surrealism is going out with a flourish and keeping the classical approach to painting.  Dali was a surgeon with his paint brush.  He carved them out perfectly.  I’ve seen some of his paintings, they are so flat, so perfectly executed.  He was a genius of cleanliness and precision.  An immaculate poet of metaphysics.  Rene Magritte is more of an abstract linguist.  He’s into philology, studying the biochemical, mystic.  Studying signs.

Borges begins his story ‘The Aleph’ with Hamlet by Shakespeare, “O God!  I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a King of infinite space…” [II, 2].  That pretty much asserts the willingness that Borges had towards text.  He brought it to life magically.  He would glitter with a sort of backward neologism, a counterfeit of the original text of his mystical symphony that is the short story writer, the chronicler of reality, the poet.  A writer of episodes, a period writer, a cyclist, a mythologist, a chronicler of le texte créé spontanément.

The Projector is the short story theorist.  We see through the eye of the projector, we see the projected.  An important thing about it is that it is significant.  The significance is rooted in the unconscious.  This is where the sphere of surrealism operates, out in the realm of the unconscious, but a literal transcript of the events of the mind conscious and unconscious together forming a complex organism, all in the network of a symbolic system like logic or grammar.  This allows us to cut into the story at any point, random or generated abstractly.  The first concepts of surrealism are concerned with the general wheel that the cycles of life make, the psychedelic wheel of great wonder and satisfaction, the projected cinema of abstract planes colliding, with the shapes of the system as the protagonists of the story.  We write a textbook about this science and present/project it in the form of an essay on surrealism.  It will be a textbook and will give a brief history of surrealism in the mind of the one-wishing-to-acquire-new-art-knowledge.

Art begins with the primitive ways of primitive man.  Idolisation and the totem.  Surrealism taps into that wheel, into the genetic structure, the chemical structures of the moment.  The moment cannot be written in historical time.  The geometer in an old photograph, an etching on leather.  Art, we say.  To primitive man, art was not separated from the concept of life.  By primitive man, I mean man 20 000 years ago, Cro-Magnon Man who came over the hills we could say, the hustler, the bustle in the hedgerow.  We have Prometheus in Kafka.  A little tale.  He tells us in the opening that there are four legends concerning Prometheus.  Kafka lays out all four and then speaks of the inexplicable mass of rock.  He says, “The legend tried to explain the inexplicablke.  As it came out of a substratum of truth it had in turn to end in the inexplicable.”

That was the Projector’s way of shortening Kafka to one paragraph.  It’s a form of translation.  He was into the absurd.  Dali composed absurd landscapes, war films on canvas, perfectly laid.  Near-perfect because no poet is perfect, not the dandyest of them.  Kafka in Borges would find a story-teller with evident secret knowledge.  The matter is important, is at hand.  I see old monks parading in the cemetery or catacombs at night grovelling over words and breathing out forbidden psalms much like Cro-Magnon who probably had obsessive-compulsive disorder.  In a way, the surrealist author is usually seen as a mad scientist of sorts.  Dali is said to have answered a question “Surrealism is Dali”.  And in fact it is true.  Surrealism is Dali.  No one would encompass the right attributes.  He made it a science.  He had the metaphysical touch, the striking landscapes, the nausea.  His drooping clocks, the ants, his most famous.  Each painting is an episode in the mosaic.  The unconscious of art history is starting to stir up some old nonsense.  We are making sense of the string of nonsense.  It was completely intertwined and we are unfurling it methodically.

Poe will treat it in the same way, with surgical precision.  Dali knew we were myrmidons.  Try to see the kaleidoscope one configuration at a time.  Reflections.  Light/Color.  Find mystical poets in Kafka, Poe, Heidegger, Kierkegaard, Borges, the short form, the essay, invention in three parts: introduction, development, conclusion.  The form of a syllogism.  You keep adding concepts to it, it churns like a machine, revolves around central poles, sub-unities, commodification and add branch: knowledge.

The scientific poet is the true aesthete.  Turning the intrinsic value of a work of art into a commodity.  The pages of the early surrealists, the dadaists, these poems, vorticist prose symphonies on one sheet, music of prose, dances, textually based material, writing, coarse writing, textile.  Backpacks in the mountains, we were moutaineers.  It rings of the symbolists and romanticism.  Does surrealism have a musical side?  Some might think Sonic Youth sounds like melting clocks and they might be right.  Sonic Youth, in its relative scale of sonic textures is delightfully cubist.  Could it be surrealist?  We would have to deconstruct the concepts.

Deconstruction One:
The first concept is art.  Second is surrealism, the other, fractions, fear/paralysis.  Dreams.  Art is constructed of a formal understanding/metaphor, a union of the part chalice, object of communion.  ‘From the Old French ‘calice, Latin calicem, calix, a cup.  Allied to calyx, but not the same word’ [English Etymology].  We have the art piece full of spirit.  We have the riders of the storm.  The trials and tribulations of ceremony.  ‘Middle English ceremonie, French cérémonie, Latin caerimonia, a ceremony, rite + Sanskrit karman, action, rite.’ [English Etymology p.75]  We have the very action of creating the piece of art that is a proven fact of every style and movement.  The point of seeing art history as concepts existing in the present is so we don’t have to deal with the past directly.  We make a passive regression into interior cycles.  Waves crash, sound, light, particles flickering in the air, moments when the ashes fall off a cigarette, when a surrealist light can be said exists, a surrealist mood.  We break it into the rite of the cup.

The second deconstruction is of the language of art.  We deconstruct it into three parts: medium of communication, mediator, and the material of the mediation.  It forms a circle, unites into a sphere or oval shape.  Baroque comes with the oval, and mathematics.  Physics and the eye, throw them in, why not?  We are geneticists, hermetic ones, deep in the night applauding our silent cinema.  To speak, to utter words, sounds, bits, bites/bytes.  You don’t know your co-ordinates.  You have no details to give about anything in the world.  You are lost in an abyss of self-linearization, tantamount to growing tired of psychoanalytic theory and delving into the province of the effect of time in language, of concepts through time in the mind, tracing and retracing etymological roots, time of writing, historical context, geometric shapes, configurations, constellations, encyclopedia, anthology.  All is a cycle of myths, stories of the lost Garden, the lost paradise, Eden, where the sin of Temporality was committed.  In this surrealistic drama, the writer is disguised as a wise shepherd who knows information that you do not know.  He will give it to you if you hear him out.  He will present to you his new rhetorical style and you will be a judge to his spiritual music.  He totally baffles you with a sterling silver voice quite naturally beautiful.  he does a dance too and has a green hat, but I don’t know why.  The words make me write this.

So then we have a communication, an understanding between many people that suggests that we have this aged story-telling character, the trickster, and the surrealist is the trickster indeed.  I can’t say much about art deals, I can only say that Dali’s paranoiac-critical method made him lots of money.  Lots and lots of money.  He MADE surrealism happen, he made it something that HAD to be reckoned with, had to be written and rewritten.  “The ‘Red Death’ had long devastated the country.  No pestilence had been ever so fatal, or so hideous.” [The Mask of the Red Death, Poe].  I will attract the eye and mind to the word pestilence.  English Etymology says, “French pestilent, Latin pestilent, stem of pestilens, from pestilis, pestilential.  Latin pesti, crude form of pestis.  Pest, French peste, Latin pestem, pestis, a plague.  Already at the beginning of the story there is a great horror.  I have once done an analysis, many analyses of Poe line by line through the whole tone poem and its true, he is a surrealist, he knew draperies, he was an Alfred Hitchcock of English prose, and poetry too.  He was a strange mystic of sorts.  

There’s a contagiousness involved in the rhetoric.  Like a disconnected impression of the words themselves meaning what is most important.  It reads laterally like a textbook, like a textbook as an example of an art examination, an examination of art.  Syntax sometimes is all you have to do to understand a problem.  The problematic is easily understood by looking at the straight facts.  The camera enters the stream of concepts at the inception of a great river of chaos.  The camera creates a unique experience of voyeurism and visionary induction.  Remember that some surrealists followed the abstract tradition whereas others followed the symbolist tradition.

One poet meets another poet and they share the explosion.  The forms of surrealism presented here are highly contagious.  One hears about them and wants to be a revolutionary.  I’d tell someone who was about to read André Breton’s manifesto of surrealism that he is full of himself.  He wasn’t the true leader that he hoped he would be.  

Fear will keep an audience streaming to the movie theatre.  They need the exhilaration.  We fear pestilence but not in the same way we fear a rollercoaster ride.  One is healthy, is ebullience.  The other is mixed with panic.

Exhibit: L. exhibitus, ex-hibere, to hold forth, exhibeo = tender,
present, deliver, give up, produce, furnish, to show, display.

instructions for Art:
first concept: mimesis:
Surrealism dies laughing
reborn in the moment:
	
	Projection is a mimesis.  The human head is a projector.  The tape is memory & imagination.  In Surrealism we play with the eye, with the image of the model and the model itself.  The Surrealism still life droops with heavy leaden sadness.  Surrealism deals with an unconscious wheel of symbolism, of emotions, characterization, a full cycle of figures, motifs, designs… it is essentially emotive.  We have the motions of the psyche, the intellectual aesthetic of the table or grid whereby shapes are fitted in a mosaic.  Symbolically, there is a mosaic.  Dali’s paintings are mosaics of strange and estranged episodes.  Surrealism is all about the in-between point between image and reflection, dream and reality.  We need to break down those walls and reconstitute what art is, what surrealism is as an art movement or genetic strain in creation.
	First we have art as mimesis, as imitation.  This is the natural image.  It exists before art.  Then art, the practise, the trade, the ambition and learning, the voyage to come up to the third term: creation of art; fourth: language of art.

SURREALISM:
	1924—1930s…
	Borges, 1932, the breaking point the division between dream and reality, similar to Cubism in the physics and mathematics aesthetic, similar to the cubist novel where fact and fiction were juggled; here in Surrealism you have dream and reality one and the same, then separate, then reunited in the Night of the Green Death.  Vaporousness, night black fierce, paintings by Magritte, Breton works, Dali, etc.  Tristan Tzara was rebel and a father to Surrealism.  
Surrealism deals with absurdity.  After World War I, the world was crushed, was broken to pieces, can be said was schizophrenic.  Surrealism had in its silence the violence that Futurism had processed.   Surrealism is the impact of Freud’s ‘Interpretation of Dreams’.   In fact, the artists of the group researched Freud and Jung.
I believe that the short story can teach what surrealism is.  I believe in an essay style that teaches all you need to know about surrealism.  I began with surrealism as a concept.  I just started writing automatically and I traced the path of the concept in my mind.  At this point, I am the point between the painting and the painted no matter where I stand.  Surrealism is metaphysical, is trying to stretch through the bounds of human thought, trying to pierce the bubble of the for-real.  How I plan to follow with an examination of surrealism through the short story is simple: I have already written it.  The story is the path of the concept through my mind.  That’s how an essay should be written.  I know it’s slightly new, but try it.  Find a concept, find related terms.  Break down everything you touch as the concept flies through your consciousness.  Look at dates if you want to be historical.  We have barely touched the core of the art objects of surrealism.  I haven’t made an analysis of any paintings, really.  But I did write what went through my mind in a search for the truth of surrealism.  Here is more:

Deconstruction Two:
It doesn’t matter what is first or second or third.  What’s important is that we list them.  We can start on whatever concept we choose.  Art history needs to be seen as the study of the interaction between concepts of art in the mind and the genealogy of those concepts.  Nothing should be missing from the train of our thesis.  If something is missing, put it in.  Some things we inevitably miss.
Dreams.  It is a whole mood, an entire experience.  Art wants to be a dream, wants to make us think we are in paradise or in hell, the emphasis being on our being-elsewhere-than-here.  Surrealism has a strict aesthetic, the metaphysical.  Creations by its artists range over whole fields of possibility but one thing unites them: the pre-World War II/post-World War I metaphysical anguish.  It couldn’t help feeling like a dream.  Dreamscapes to make life easier.
 Art as we know it, as expression of the gradients of our inner clockwork, has existed for well over 20 000 years.  When did it clash with science?  It has clashed with science numerous times.  One of the most prominent of those times was during the reign of Cubism and Surrealism.  If we look at the picture correctly, we can actually see Cubism and Surrealism as one movement.  A movement that spanned across a good thirty years.  What is the advantage of seeing them as one movement?  None, really.  I just thought it could be interesting to see them as one, maybe see all the movements of art history as one singular artistic moment moving with concepts and tools through time [concepts as tools].  The artistic moment moves with the full machinery of art.  For if we saw Cubism and Surrealism as one movement, we would see it as Analytical Cubism, Synthetic Cubism, and Surrealism, all of which have the same basic elements.  The aesthetic of numbers, of counting, the flashing of thoughts in the mind, science, physics especially; where cubism is concerned with the theory of relativity surrealism is concerned with quantum theory.  Cubism would be the intellectual side, the analytical side, and surrealism would be the expressionist counteragent.
The objects that came out of and can take the name of surrealism have the same power as an object/image from a dream.  The painting is an image, is also an object.  The surface is seen as a 2-dimensional plane but in fact is 3-dimensional.  The painting has width, and it is to its advantage that it has it.  Without a width, the surrealist painting could not captivate us, could not reach out and pull us into its deep abyss.  We lose ourselves under the surface and come out knowing ourselves the better.
Surrealism, then, is an engine of individualization.  You stare into it and find where you stand in the cycle of your mind.  Handled with care, the painting shows a mastery over forms [natural and plastic].  Better yet, Surrealism is created when there is a bourgeois democracy in a colony.  It also happens in the mainland, but differently.  The colonies are more automatic, like in Quebec during the rise and fame of surrealism.  Borduas and his group of Automatists.
Simulacrumists unite!  Perseus has outsmarted Medusa with the use of mirrors.  Makes me think of photocopies.  Deconstruction = find centers, find multiple readings, decentralize. Metaphysics: what bare nature something has in order to be at all.  Architects make what is most needed.  The are developers of realities.  Surrealism is literary as it is pictorial.  

AN INTERLUDE:
On The Surrealism Textbook:

We have to take a look at Surrealism at this point. 
It was born and has passed.  We are now in the
after-age of Surrealism, so it needs to be perceived
in today’s light, with the knowledge that we have at
this stage about art, technology, and science.

A  The textbook style:
I have used the regular textbook style because I find
it uses the features of text well enough that it can
be of use in writing about Surrealism.  Surrealism is
a school with a long history (200+ years).  It has its
roots in Romanticism, in Dada, in literary futurism. 
In Quebec, Surrealism has its own special place in the
political and artistic fields of activity.  I hope
that this textbook style fulfils what the reader needs
to understand the concepts we will organize and teach.
 

B What is happening in Quebec?
I chose Quebec as the center of my essay because I
live in Quebec, it’s as simple as that. I didn’t want
to generalize too much with other countries such as
Canada or France because I don’t know what it’s like
to live in those countries and the study would have
been too hard and too long for my intents and
purposes.  

Problems to solve: PROBLEM 1
What do Surrealism and Cinema have in common?

Film is an interface.  Its tape is the long tale of
Romanticism that mutated into Surrealism.  Classicism
had once turned into Cubism at another time
altogether, in another age.  It is true that a world
war changes the era, creates a pre- and post-war
universe.  War rattles all the scales.  Measuring
changes with war.  Techniques and procedures change,
so do the people.  This is a sociolinguistic art
history piece in the form of a creative textbook. 
Film and Surrealism have a dialectic.  Surrealism is a
state of mind, so is the experience of the cinema.

C
“…the common ground between romanticism and surrealism
can be found in their experimentation with
non-rational methods of acquiring knowledge
(spiritism, magnetism, hypnosis, cabalism) and with
surrational modes of expression and creation
(somnambulism, eroticism, dreams, automatic writing).”
—p.4, Surrealism and Quebec Literature, André G.
Bourassa
There’s a mythological twist to Surrealism in Quebec. 
There are many young surrealist poets in Quebec at
present.  

What has happened to the strains of Automatism that
lit up Quebec in the 1940’s and 1950’s?  They are
still blaring full-fire.

Self-testing exercises 1A
1What is Surrealism?
2 What is Art?
3 Who is the Artist?

Answers:
1 Surrealism is two things, a movement in art and a
state of mind.  It is also a unique perspective. 
Maybe not as ground-breaking as the Cubist
perspective, but one nonetheless, and one that would
outlive Cubism by 80 years.  Cubism is dead whereas
Surrealism is still thriving.  
2 Art is a state of being.  It is beingness in motion,
being absorbed and dispelled by the living human
characters that walk this sad earth.  Art accompanied
with mad love, mad passion, is Surrealism.  Eroticism
at its highest.  Art is the creation of aesthetic
objects.
3 The artist is the man or woman who wears the costume
of matador when fighting the insane wild beast known
sometimes as Minotaur, or problematic in living theory
of self-criticism.  The Minotaur is what we fight when
we create art.  The artist is both Minotaur and
Theseus, Dedalus, and Ariadne.

D In the studio:
In the studio, the surrealist performs alchemy.  He
turns materials to gold, paper, cardboard, metals,
wood.  Everything the surrealist artist touches turns
to a macabre gold, in the burlesque that is his/her
life crossing the abysms of fire.

The magician takes out his brush/wand.  He stirs the
air and a heavenly music spews forth.  He holds the
world at his fingertips.  His eye is the eye of the
camera, of the absolute film agent: CAMERA O CAMERA,
what thou art I cannot rightly say… a glum pastiche of
episodic affairs, to the memory you shield a great
basket of worth, a treasury beneath the photographic
paper.  Hail the sacristic virgin paper-smith, the boy
who throws daily news onto your front door, the
surrealistic poet, him, she, the doodads girl, the
dandy philosopher neighbor, a kind smithyman, works
hard pounding belt buckles together, is in the fire 10
hours a day making weapons for the war.  He is a poet
if he is surrealistic, a poet of fine art, which is
none finer than in painting and photography.  The
Daguerreotype changed painting forever.  It did what
painting did to the ancient art of engraving.  It
began with the ancient stone engraver, the cave-man
leaving his mark in the earth, in the mountains, the
caverns.  Painting came on by to exteriorize the
project.  Carving is more primitive, even animals
change their territories to make it home.  Art came
about from the concept of home, of human dwellings, of
the abode, place of commonwealth and warmth, pride,
fit for the shield of Achilles, a hearth, an isle, a
projection in a green light of one of Molière’s
masterpieces.

The surrealist poet thrives in Quebec, came from
Quebec.  Louis Riel was still a romantic poet.  We
would have our first precursor to the surrealist novel
called ‘L’Influence d’un livre’ in 1837 by Philippe
Aubert de Gaspé fils, a writer interested in the
cabalistic aspect of romanticism.

Montreal city at night is a surrealist paradisio. 
Through the midnight fog on a cold winter night, in
the light beams from car lights we see just the very
description of surrealism; in the light we see the
macabre shapes of death and corporeal obsession.  

“Tight in his fist, the surrealist poet holds the
doors closed, then opens them to illuminate the inside
of his unconscious mind.”

Ludicrous poets of the human mind, advocates of Freud
and Jung, automatists all; in recreational drug use,
the modern Quebecois vagabond youngster, midnight pot
smoker in the city neon streets, St-Catherine on pcp
seeing the great wonderworld that is Montreal on
hallucinogenic drugs.  It reminds me of
cubo-futurists, the saturated texture of chalk. 
Projections on a screen.  A green gem, purely
twittering.

E Update on Textbook Style:
Again, I’m using the textbook style because it fits
the pattern laid out by the human mind.  The pattern
of the concepts of surrealism have to be created in
the mind of the reader, and so we follow the form of
these thoughts, these ideas, these concepts, and the
reader benefits in a threefold way: 1 the reader
absorbs the forms of the thoughts of surrealism; 2 the
reader has the thought-material in the form of a
particular text to study and re-study; 3 the forms are
basic forms and easy to understand and eventually
imitate.  The textbook style is a modern style and is
most efficacious.  It follows the modern reader’s mind
in its absurd business of thought-propagation.

F Film theory: 
Hero of the vagabond night, caught breathless under a
bridge in the city paradisio, young surrealist heart
caving at the thought of the winter, on swollen nights
heart ajar breathing in the stillness of the frozen
eves spent in the street bumming quarters to buy beer…
old in our youth, bundled together in the cold… a
sweet heart that adores great souls, at night, plugged
to video-games for the heat of the arcade.  We sow the
vagaries of the Imagination of the future.

Young Quebecois surrealists on drugs in the warmth of
an apartment in Nôtre-Dame-de-Grace.  Revolutionaries
at heart, these young Quebecois artists panhandle in
the day and dream long battles of reason at night. 
They sit down in darkened rooms and indulge in
extemporaneous dialogues.  They are modern day
sophists standing before a newly painted picture.  The
painter rises and says, “I haven’t painted so strong
an image in months if not days.  Each day seems like a
million years since I’ve been smoking this new weed. 
Montreal has the best weed.”

The textbook style is also a cut-up style.  Everything
is meant to be cut up into thin slices, into small
compartments.  Easier to understand that way.  And its
simpler to follow the shapes of surrealist
consciousness that way too.  

G Geographical plays::
Surrealism plays games with its artists.  Artists of
surrealism are anti-bourgeois and anti-avant-garde. 
Surrealism is traditionally mystical.  

On Literary Surrealism:
Inscription… image, the image coming out, popping out,
surfacing… images surfacing in the moment, temporality
of the now, the eminent moment, the now, the energetic
nowness… turbulence, movement, program of movement,
regulation, temperance, subsection, prolepsis…

Image, what is the image? an image?  We are at the
head of the moment in art and we want to know what the
image is that surfaces and is made known by time’s
slow lift, slow unveiling in the moment, the artistic
moment, the now of art, the upsurge in nowness of
temporality in art…

The unconscious opens up and an image, an imprint, a
memory is disclosed.  The image of memory is
intangible, concrete and abstract at the same time, is
opposed to historical materialism by being a mere
image, but is powerful in the moment as an image of
the unconscious…

Inscription is active meaningfulness…

Inscription of the image of memory passing by printed
in the consciousness of the viewer.  An image while we
watch what exists pass before us, we inscribe the
moment in our memories, have memories pass by our
conscious minds, memories from the unconscious…

Inscription in the moment of images from the
unconscious, inscription of the events transpiring. 
Surfacing of emotional content through perception
inscribed in the memory things passing, transpiring. 
Images surfacing in the moment…

Reading and writing in the moment.  The human
participant is seated at a table.  He reads the moment
as it transpires and writes it in his memory in the
same measure.  The active spirit making an
inscription.  The mind is startled by what transpires
before its flashing mind.  The mind picks things up in
waves, from A to B to C to D picking up signals from
the environment.  The event exists, takes place,
subsists, projects, entangles, submits everything
perceptible to the brain that is running alongside it
waiting for the conscious mind to take the signal, the
mind awake yawning freaked out over all the
discoveries.

The mind of the watcher is alive, is riding.  Stop. 
Take first perceptual gauge.  Realize what you are
receiving.  Make a transcript of what is for real. 
Whatever reality gives to you, take it and make a note
of it in your memory, in the unconscious mind.

The conscious mind is receiving information from the
world perceptually manifest.  The human being takes in
visual information, auditory data, and transforms it
into meaningful memories.  The meaning is arbitrary,
oftentimes the unconscious memories have all sorts of
absurd meanings added to experiences.  You actively
experience, which means: you write your reality.  You
read what is existent and write it into your memory. 
It’s an inscription.  The mind works with images,
images popping up, resurfacing from the memorial
function.  The subtext is a meaningful paradise, a
paradise in prose that lays below the actively
realizable moment transcript.  Images surface into
consciousness from the unconscious.  It happens all
day long.  We are experiencing history, our
temporality is threefold: of narrative time, of
allegorical time, of present time.  Time present is
unrealizable.  The eminent now is in process.  Nowness
is alive in humans and is energetic.  Power comes from
its able rush.

The prolepsis is an archaism, an incongruity, a
mistiming, an anachronism, a misdate.  The artistic
moment is the moment of creation, its exact read-out. 
The transcript of the moments of creation can mean two
things: the origin of the universe, the genesis of the
creative moment in the artist, his mind and his body
working to create a work of art, an object of art,
working in the moment with ambient temporality,
floating freedom waving wands conjuring a paradisaical
sphere of ontology and epistemology.  Both
epistemology and ontology work together in metaphysics
to create a moment.  The images to make these concepts
are readily available.  They are trapped in the back
of our minds.  We have all the materials to create the
concepts of art history held in our memories, all over
our brains, patterns, codes… we see the origin of the
first concepts of art as a mystical
emanation-theorist’s viewpoint on the genesis of art,
of the mind, of text, of abstract spirituality. 
Mathematical truths pop in and we see a truer and
fuller image of what is happening sociologically,
politically, economically.  We have an actual moment
of development.  The objects of art are in effect, are
being moved, have been sold/traded.  When the objects
of art trade hands… when a tradition of mysticism and
painting crops up in Quebec in the year 2001… when the
mind is printing out its transcript, is inscribing the
fundaments of its moment in time, with blinding
nowness…

It is concrete and abstract at the same time.  The
objects teach us about class, about economical truths
that make up real life.  We have themes and anthems in
human psychology.  Themes are strong influences in the
origins of thought.  Anthems are what we breathe in
the moment, what we acknowledge, what we know, in
accord with what we live for: our
passions/inclinations.  Inscription is active
meaningfulness.

Images pass in the unconscious.  Concepts are being
used in cognition.  Art history exists in the mind, is
activated by conscious means.  The Image surfaces in
the moment.  The Image is a Wheel, is a Lotus leaf, is
a Rainbow.  It is a Prism, a Triangle.  The tune
chimes and we are imperatively real.  We are actively
singing our Song, our Anthem or Refrain.  The moment
is a moment both of Reading and of Writing.  We are
reading the code of the moment, of the events
transpiring; we make a print-out for storage in
memory, a read-out of what took place existentially in
the sacred moment.  Each moment is repeated in the act
of writing to memory.  We imprint pictures, sounds of
what occurs in existence.  We control matter and
time-pockets by singing the Anthem.  The Anthem
congeals matter, materials.  It is from the sphere of
influence/rhetoric.  Write Rhetoric to Reason.  We are
seated and actively realizing consciousness of
consciousness, knowledge of knowledge, meta-knowledge,
and we feel we’re in a dream.  The dream within the
dream… colliding with dreams, with desires,
phantasies.  Stop: create a vision of what is readily
real.  What on the forefront strikes you as visibly
real.  Gauge it, assess it.  Realize what the
processes of your mind are.  Make an imprint on
memory’s dear fibers.  

The human participant is kneeling, praying.  He reads
the information that comes in through the senses.  His
unconscious mind adheres to cognitive laws , to forces
of the brain.  The brain runs on its own liquids.  The
meanings we add to experience are written in an
arbitrary fashion/process.  Prolepsis, misdating, the
process of forgetting, of rewriting reality in an
absurd new code, new language.  When you rewrite
reality in your mind, filtering out, warping things
that were perceived, read in a new way with stories,
myths, dreams.  Creation is an important factor of the
active spirit’s enjoyment/fulfillment.  The hero of
the modern pastoral landscape, me, myself, and I, we
return to the moment of the battle of the senses, at
the vanguard of what is forsaken and real, what
exists… we make the necessary inscription, the
hieroglyph, the illustration.  Patterns.  Codes.  This
is what is happening right now in Quebec in the year
2001.

SURREALISM AGAINST SURREALISM:
Snow-white caps in the mountainous regions, the Alps, white-capped and snowy, mountains, full of mounts, peaks, all in an effigy painted on glass; the glass is broken.  No longer a religious rite.  It’s become more than a practise.  It’s a way of being.  Surrealism is an internal logic, the logic of physics, of internal spheres, galaxies, the inward universe.  It works in the unconscious, deeply embedded there to stay, remain the most inward part, our minds, our spirits, souls, and hearts.  The living heart is most special.

It isn’t bothersome to be a surrealist.  It just means you watch movies without watching, basically.  You favor disorientation to a ballroom dance.  You are the lone cipher.  Here you are, There you are, how In-between you are.

The reader’s digest edition of Surrealism for beginners.  First you take them through the main parts of it, the peaks, the heights of the wave of surrealism that needs to be created to write about it purely and without too much disorder.  Writing about Surrealism is hard.  You never know where to begin, where to place your primary premises, propositions.  The logic of surrealism is fascistic.  In France, Surrealism was to young surrealists what the car-chase was in futurism.  It is a self-awareness to the nth degree.  Surrealism was a movement about Surrealism.  That’s the catch of Surrealism against Surrealism, it’s where to begin, in what hemisphere.  The dream has curved within, dream within a dream within a dream… photocopies of photocopies, one of the most modern concepts, yet one of the oldest: translation.

So you see the same shapes coming back to haunt us.  The wall of noise is a thesis on religion, the object, and Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder.  At heart, surrealism is a movement of the passions, of spontaneous creativity and force of impact, combative, clear and confused, the dichotomy of dream and reality bending like light across great bending-forces of gravity and wormholes.  Ashes to ashes, dust to dust…

THEORY OF SYMBOL:
Religion, religious symbols, the Cross, Tabernacle, Cup
Spirituality and the object of possession, double meaning, possessedness and ownership
Across the myriad generations of mankind, traditions are passed
Text is one of the bases of religion
Colonization, flags
word is symbol, allegory and spiritual might
the investment of prayer and relaxation, visualization therapy
Phenomenology of the Spirit:
Songs, psalms, prayers…
Objectification, Compartmentalization
physics, the eye
	MUSIC AND HEIDEGGER:
The musical experience and an understanding of Being and Time
Polyrhythms, Polytonality, Chromatic tones, scales,
Microtonality, harmonic structures, Being and Time
Spatiality = harmony, tonality, scales, a number system, a scale of gradients, each step is a new value, is in relation to all other tones.  There is a relativity to each note played.
MUSIC HISTORY:
Romanticism, Rhetoric, Publishing, the Russian composers.
Chopin, revolutionary composers, Beethoven,
The Baroque and Mathematics, the fugue, reversion, rhetorico-musical figures, the retrograde, etc.  Sonata form, essay style, sonata-style, the aesthetic experience of pastoral music, thunder, lightning, all the reproductions of the sounds of nature…
Modern times: polytonality etc, rich harmonic structures, jazz, improvisation, music in the moment that it is improvised, music that moves the emotions, expressionism, Satie, colors, color music, color theory THE EYE AND PHYSICS, THE EAR
Energy, displacement, courage, the Anthem, music in the moment
Being and its involvement in the moment of music, the musical moment
Musical tales, these are all musical tales, teachings via music theory and music history
Sciatura, MORDENTS, ORNAMENTS, embellishments, ornamentation and the poetic foot, Romanticism, rhetorical figures as to form, music and poetry and tone, mood poetic and otherwise.  APPOGGIATURA, the short appoggiatura, often called acciaccatura, is performed as a quick grace note before the main note, without taking away from the latter’s position or value.
GENERAL SYSTEM THEORY: Symbolic systems: language, logic, mathematics, sciences, arts, morals, etc.  Algorithms of symbols (e.g. mathematics, grammar); “rules of the game” such as in visual arts, music, etc.  A symbolic system that is Tonal Cinema.  
Causality and Teleology
The System Concept
Concepts of religion, of eschatology, ontology, metaphysics
The object of religion, mysticism and religion… two brothers…
Art and the religious tradition, oral tradition, teachers and initiates
Surrealism is the realization of all the points above.  Cubism came from fascist oppressive factors.  Surrealism is a revolt, is a paranoid mind-frame.  Theory always has a history involved in its denouement.  History has figures.  Figures mean rhetoric.
The main concepts of art are Polarities, the Unconscious, Rationality/Mathematic/Logic/Basic Shapes, Color, Technique, Aesthetic, Themes, Manifesto/literary style, Illusion.  All art movements are the same thing, art is always art, there is only one art: art.  Different times have different mixtures of the elements.  It’s the same will and the same passion for all of them.  The main concepts of art history are the movements, Baroque, Romanticism, Suprematism, Futurism, Cubism, Expressionism, Fauvism, Impressionism, Surrealism [not in any set order].
The different configurations of the parts of art history are called Contexts.  In one context the movement is heavy in color, or is heavy on brushstrokes.  Some movements strive to hide the brushstrokes, some want to show them, as some want thick cakes of paint on the canvas and others apply the bare necessity of oil paint.  About Polarities.  Baroque art has the mirror reflection, the eye; fantasy in Romanticism is the screen of the unconscious.  Surrealism is a modernism.  Passion and Wisdom make art memorable.  Pleasure, desire, Kant’s advice… purposiveness in art, is that possible?  Art vs. Nature, Artistic Creation: a mystical practise.  Painting is a craft, has a tradition.  A dual process, cabalistic and the physical process.  Creating in the physical and metaphysical planes.  Ontology [I am] and epistemology [I think].

Movements filled by:
Ornament: Rhetorical ornamentation, branches of the tree, the forest, idylls; figure, line, perimeter, light/dark polarity.  Baroque uses Reflections as much as Surrealism.  What we are attempting is to deconstruct art’s concepts into a concise formulation that is all of art history and art theory in one moment.  To do that, we cannot be brief.  We must cut through all the concepts of art in as little time as we can, and so we move on.
Metaphysic, Aesthetic, Ontology;
Phenomenology, Cognition/Psychology.

Much of Surrealism is Existentialist art, conceptual.  They made concepts figural, made figures conceptual.  I cannot give a full history of philosophy in this essay so I will write down the names of several of the different branches of philosophy as I perceive it in the moment:
Aesthetics
Ethics
Epistemology
Phenomenology
Ontology
Metaphysics

	If I wrote the full history of the schools of thought involved in these separate sciences, I would have a philosophy textbook.  If I were writing a textbook, I would want it to deal more with cinema than physics or arithmetic. I’m for all that is cinematic at heart.

	The New Logic of Art History:
	Art history is composed of several movements spanning, depending on your clock, up to 2000 years at least.  Unfortunately, we’re not going to go further back than the Renaissance, or even just as far as the Baroque period.  Surrealism is where we will end up at.  We’ll begin with the concepts of art history.
	A movement has an ideology, whether it be consciously known or not consciously known.  The Baroque is all about inlays in the walls, panels, ornamentation, illustration; polarity came from the Renaissance, and by polarity I mean the clair/obscur, the light and the dark in painting.  We needn’t go further than the canvas and the brush, but seeming as this is a textual analysis, we must begin at the beginning of the creation of art as religious necessity.
	Man could not live with the symbol, he needed to devote his life to higher forces.  Word was too strong and needed an outlet in religion.  Rites… each rite is like a word being spit out forming the lexicon of experience that is the genetic code we carry up to our teeth, spitting out words from the DNA dictionary.  Surrealism is a fine place to land, to settle, to accommodate as headquarters.  In the beginning, however, there was art for several thousand years, and there were monks painting in the sand as well as painters in their studios, the merchant/painter of the Renaissance, the hired gun, the Renaissance man.  Commodification came with the rise of capitalism and well into the Baroque [at its end] the Industrial Revolution caused human consciousness to shatter.  The pieces that this global consciousness would shatter into after the Enlightenment would be numerous, some quite numinous, and could be noted in the form of a critique of the history of art from the Industrial Revolution onwards.
From the first gear-cutting machine to the camera, technology and art have run side by side.  We could give an exact description of the changes in consciousness after major technological advancements.  Many optical devices would create a warped perception in the viewer such that an art such as Cubism or Surrealism could possibly exist.  The Camera would affect the creators of Impressionism and Cubism.  In this way, the concepts that we use of the history of art have been tested, have been digested by civilization, have passed from mouth to ear a million times, and a new metaphysic is being constructed through the toil of years and years through revolution and disarray, through disillusionment.  War would tighten the rope on the evolution of machines.  War would change the architectural shape of the foundation of the universe.  This is the shape that we aim to outline.  As in Marx’s Capital, we wish to outline the current logic of art history.

We’ve given ourselves quite the task.  Unwinding art history in this new way would necessitate hours and hours of work, but I share with you that I am fully willing to invest the time to cover art history laterally, and I’ve already spent quite a long time getting to where I stand at present.
Therefore,



THE LANGUAGE OF ART HISTORY:
Therefore, we have a lexicon of art history terms.  We’re not going to name all that needs to be named in art history, because art history can be seen as more than one science, i.e. the history of art criticism, biography of artists, etc.  We will combine the practise of art with art history to make a smaller shared lexicon of which we will immediately speak.
The first terms of the lexicon are as follows:
Metaphysic, Binary Contraries (black/white, light/dark, dream/reality, original/copy, reading/writing), Medium, Time.  Time of creation, date, the time of creation, duration of.  The Medium changes from oil to pastel to gouache.  The Binary Contraries of art history from the Industrial Revolution till now pan from Dark/Light to Original/Copy, and then to Dream/Reality.  The Dream/Reality dichotomy has always existed.  In fact, all the concepts of art history have existed since the first artist, Cro-Magnon Man 20 000 years ago.  When you create, art history is made; therefore, the language of the history of art will comprise of both the artist and his art, her trade, tradition.
The Metaphysical Context is extremely important.  It marks the season of the art.  Art is all about seasons.  The Time of Creation is lost or unattainable.  The new logic of art history dictates that all material in representational studies, conceptual, theoretical, critical, is of even weight.  When we talk of creation, of its co-ordinates in temporality, we talk of numbers, durations that can be awfully arbitrary as units of representation in themselves, and that can mean something else when viewing the actual product [the art].
Time of, and you’re screwed.  You can’t have time of anything.  Time of reading, time of writing, time of painting, time of viewing.  How can we truly measure?  We can’t.  An example: I say the time of creation was 5 o’clock Wednesday evening.  When you view my painting 5 years later, the time of creation has changed.  The new time of creation is the time of viewing because viewing a painting involves the creation of the concepts of the art piece in the mind of the viewer.  That’s all I had to say.

Surrealism began as far back as 1916.  It was a movement about a movement.  The whole point of surrealism was to be a surrealist.  It is entirely romantic, has its roots further back in the period called Romanticism.  Dada can be said to be a forefather of Surrealism, but Dadaism is different, it only forms part of the guts of Surrealism.  The mechanics.  The pleasure of Surrealism is something else, is seeing oneself in the mirror and applauding the disjunction of the sun from the moon.
How can I perform a Surrealist act?  Take some paint and throw it on a canvas.  The result, according to the chaos involved in its automatic creation, will be a Surrealist painting at this point.  That wasn’t always necessarily true.  A while back, dripping created Abstract Expressionism.  But today we are living in one of Surrealism’s folds, so an automatic splash-painting is Surrealistic.  Abstract Expressionism and Surrealism [as Automatism] have a lot in common.  Veristic Surrealism is more about dreams and symbolism.
Surrealism has a literalness about it; objects in the paintings are dream-objects, are both literal and figurative; the cloth that represents the ocean is at first a cloth, only becomes an ocean through our faculty of metaphor.  Objects are literal representations.  The painting in surrealism is a painting, nothing more.  The pipe is not a pipe, it’s a painting.  But dream objects are what?  The wheel is a wheel, not a metaphor for things cyclic.  But being a dream, or from a dream, the objects have this double meaning to them, and even triple: the cloth is a cloth, is an ocean, is from a dream where it is both simultaneously.
Art history these days is concerned with rewriting history, with looking at art history in new ways.  The language is very modern, is in fact an art on its own.  Whenever I read a new art history book, I am amazed by the writers’ talents, yet it’s all a hoax, a lie, a trick; they really have no new ideas, just new words and sentences.  What I tried to do is show the concept of surrealism as it is in my mind and as you have seen, it’s not very clear, it’s mostly just simple poetics.  I don’t know why I wrote it, it just gripped me somehow and made me write it in this way.
Art history has no leaders.  Maybe that’s why the writers lack talent.  There are a few extraordinary art historians, however, such as Wylie Sypher who wrote ‘Rococo to Cubism in Art and Literature’ which is a work of staggering genius.  What I mean to say when I say that we have a lexicon of art history terms, I mean to say that art history, when it comes down to it, is all about syntax and grammar, about formulating in text what the art represents, and so this justifies my reckless digressions and unfinished paragraphs.  My idea was to write a Surrealistic essay, and I think it worked.  There should be, in this essay, all that is needed to construct the concept of Surrealism.  If not, then look elsewhere, there shouldn’t be much left to create the basic concept of Surrealism in your mind.  All that’s left to write now is an epilogue.

EPILOGUE:
Surrealism can be said to be a vibe, a wave, a spiral; it strives through consciousness as it does through history; through the cycles, through metaphysical reality, changing the very foundation of what exists, being and non-being; Surrealism is an existential science of displacement, of over-writing.
“The first public railway in the world was opened in 1825 on the Stockton and Darlington line and was worked by a Stephenson locomotive.”  I could necessarily take this random quote and be a surrealist if I was doing it exactly right, which is the manner of the Surrealists, the super-poet of exacting grace and attitude; shelves and shelves of randomly-placed paper, rooms full of the answer, minds running on all the fuel available.  Surrealism is a science in four ways: 1)it is a state of knowing; 2)it is a system or method reconciling practical ends with scientific laws; 3)it is a department of systematized knowledge as an object of study; 4)it is a system of knowledge covering general truths.  The first truth that makes it at all possible is the effect of Reflection [Polarity].  The reflection-polarity function is to distinguish the item, act, as a surrealist tool of contemplation.  Contemplation of what?  Surrealism contemplates itself, its place, its origin, its process of permutation.  Dadaism is not an abject influence; Surrealism retains the strain known as Dadaism.  It retained the Dadaist gesticulation, the gestural language of miming.  Imitation of what?  Surrealism is not an imitation in the strict manner of speaking.  Surrealism is only an imitation if the definition of imitation becomes, through a process of variation, a definition that includes mimicry as an act that: a)imitates its own character, sometimes in self-mocking irony, other times in flagrant bombast, b)repeats the code of its existence; c)legitimatizes its content; d)is cultural, therefore, the self mimics the culture that produced it.  In the last sense, Surrealism imitates World War I.  Cubism imitated the industrial revolution.

	The art of Salvador Dali can be said to resemble certain Renaissance artists, Pre-Raphaelites even, in technique.  Dali is a classical painter in a modern world.  He exacts his lustrous texture thinly, surgically, to the full fruition of a long tradition of painting.  He knows the macabre, the sublime, the fantastic, the marvellous, the destitute; Dali’s landscapes are hellish, show scenes devastated by war, by mass hysteria, by pride and guilt, a touch of dream, death, and absurdist symbolism.  The absurd truth is the truth of Surrealism.

	What Time does to art: makes it valuable, gives it age, gives it strength, creates new meanings.  The list goes on.  That’s why Time is one of the fundamental concepts of Art History, and especially, Surrealism since we are in the Return of Surrealism [our technology and consciousness demands it: in Quebec].  As the painter dips his brush in paint, makes a line on the otherwise empty canvas, in certain times, times of war, times of recession, Surrealism exists in colonies and in the mother or fatherland.
	The canvas is surreally a 4-dimensional surface.  Not to mention the room that it reflects, sucks in with its powerful whirlpool of physical attraction, its gyres of gravity keeping matter material, alluding to the immaterial white-sheets waterfall, a glazed planet wrapped in its own smoke… burning…
	When the object changes, you have a new awareness, you have changes in the cultural balance; when the world is at war, fear, hatred, and confusion turn the art into an art that pierces, that stabs, that bleeds, that ruptures, warps, collides, explodes.  This is Surrealism.  World War I created it with the help of living strains of Romanticism and the Baroque, the Renaissance [in Dali].  I mention Dali because Dali is Surrealism.  None of the other painters matter, though I would like to speak of them, I shall not because I speak of the science of surrealism, not especially the individual products of it.  That’s still another book: the practical essay on Surrealism is coming and will institute the traditional art history lesson of individual art works, analysis, criticism of each, the personal history of the separate artists, the artists in groups, exhibitions, manifestos.  That will be the practical side: this is the pure theory of Surrealism.
	Surrealist music is not an area that has had a lot of attention in the course of its evolution.  What would Surrealist music be?  What music came in the 1930s? the 1940s?  I’m not a musicologist, but I can tell you one thing: Bela Bartok wrote his Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta in 1936.  The beginning sounds haunted.  This is the fear that I speak of, Bartok sounds frightened when Music for begins confusedly.  Slowly the music generates a half-tension slowly rising descending, quietly rumbling musical notes; we can see the Romanticism already.  Traces are easy to find these days, since everything became perfectly interconnected.  After a certain number of years, everything makes sense, I’ve noted.
	Five minutes into Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta a constant crescendo is continuing where in the seventh minute it rises high winds back down through various metamorphoses.  That’s the Andante tranquillo, it lasts 10 minutes and 33 seconds.  I like the Allegro with its sharp madness, agitation.  All very Surrealistic, I’d say.  It fills my definition, abides by the rules with which I judge, the criteriology.

	Therefore, Surrealism passes on a touch of over-writing.  What is over-writing?  If I purposely place myself in a situation of angst and tension, I am fighting directly with what is physically manifest.  If I choose disorientation over order and balance, I am willingly corrupting existential matter, I am putting myself forth to a displacement.  Over-writing can be said to be a method of corruptibility, of a spiritual taint, a flavor of existentialism whose influence is still figuring in art history to-day; over-writing is how a culture bounces back after a great war.  Surrealism is the science of reconstitution, but it is fraudulent.
Surrealism is a state of knowing what?  Knowledge of its knowledge, knowledge of its existence, intimate knowledge of the various planes of existence, of eternal truths, sublime truths, realms of infinity and absurdity.  Surrealism is a system of thought, of actions, a system of being.  Thirdly, Surrealism, we said, is a department of systematized knowledge as an object of study: this is evident in the course of this present reading: the essay known as ‘Surrealism’.  It is a system of knowledge covering general truths: the concepts of art history as seen through the eye of Surrealism.  Surrealism is the science of the eye.  The reflection-polarity of Surrealism is first instituted by the eye.  The eye sees an outside universe, separates itself from this universe, hence instituting the first polarity.  Secondly, the other pole is a reflection of your self; the outside world resembles us, we learn in time.  From the eye we move to knowledge.  Knowledge always breaks down into this and the not-this, the that, the not-this-or-that, progressing in a genealogical tree.  Another polarity in Surrealism is the left-brain/right-brain polarity; Surrealism consists of an equal share of left-brain faculties (the rational side) and right-brain functions (the creative side).

“Madmonks spiritbound in western wayward hideaways.”

	Tonal Cinema is a form of literary surrealism.  It is a stream-of-consciousness form of writing by annotating each episode of the spirit with frames to a film seen in the imagination of the reader.  The poet of Tonal Cinema merely hints at the unconscious images that we all have stacked up in our brains.  Tonal Cinema is our fabled Inscription.  One glyph at a time, we scratch our film on the page of our minds.  It’s a delicate process that requires a well-defined methodology.  Tonal Cinema is the science of Surrealism wearing a carnival mask.  The main figures of Tonal Cinema are the Projector/Projectionist, the Exhibition, Vapors/Abysms, and Vortex.  Vortex is the mechanics side of the science, the Exhibition is the database of images needed in the concepts of Tonal cinema, and Vapors/Abysms is the wave of narratives and the reading/writing module.  Projector/Projectionist is the abstract spirituality of Tonal Cinema.  It has a literal and metaphorical intention.
Surrealism deals with inversion, conversion, immersion, and submersion.  Tonal Cinema deals with separation, concentration, repetition, and objectification.  In Tonal Cinema, the main character is as much the sentence as the paragraph, all is holographic: each part represents and mirrors the whole.
Tonal Cinema is Heidegger mixed with Music Theory.  It’s hard to formulate thoughts on Tonal Cinema because its nature is to deceive.  The deception wears away after a while and you have the possibility of a new style, or a treatise on how a new style is imminent, an analysis of art in Quebec and how it is paving the way for this new style that I call Tonal Cinema.  It’s made out of the same fabric as all the other concepts of art history.
At any rate, the dialectic is prepared to close.  What would be needed is an essay this size about Tonal Cinema as an ideogram and perhaps I shall write it.  I feel we’ve covered the basics of art history as regards Surrealism.  The only other thing I could add to this essay would be samples of Surrealistic prose, but hopefully you’ve found a great sample in the prose of this essay; I tried to be as Surrealistic as I could, yet one never perfects an art, one only adds another day to the learnings.
***
THE END

A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
