The Concept in Painting:
09/06/02 7:51:48 PM

I
Is it possible to say that the concept, rightful to philosophy, has crossed into painting at certain points?  Sure, it’s possible, but is it true?  When dealing with painting as a practise, it is important to define which practise you mean.  There are as many kinds of painting as there have been tools, materials, techniques, and cultural conditions.  Just as in philosophy one must denote when the concept first arose, if one wants to trace the history of certain concepts, in painting one must indicate which type of painting, and when it began.  I am almost tempted to put the marker low and cover several centuries of painting, from the Renaissance to the present, but with this text I shall actually only be covering a short period in the history of painting, and try to see if within it we can find the concept.  If we cannot find it, we will expand our focus and search elsewhere, in another time frame.  I’ll also consider the possibility that there is no concept in painting.
Observing a painting is definitely an experience.  It is not merely a group of sensations, such as sight, sound, of the painting and its immediate environs, the experience of going to the museum, the already rich experience of institutional voyages.
I don’t think that I can be general in this essay.  I shall have to resort to writing of individual works chosen from the history of painting, ranging roughly from 1880 to 1960.  After 1960, it gets harder to determine what is and what isn’t painting.

Ready-made, painting on glass, what do these things say? Cubism, abstract expressionism, ideology and constructivism, social art, communistic art, capitalistic art is where the concept comes in, circulation, economy, semiology.. enjambment
Teeth shattering like lapels in the wind.
Teeth chattering like in the wind.

Teeth chattering like marble mobiles
in the windy barnhouse on Thor’s night.

Fernand Léger’s Circus, his Aesthetic of the Machine…


Chiaroscuro, the use of shadow and light to describe volume (Cubism and Culture, p.64)
The three-quarter view in portraiture (one of the Impressionists basically made it an official part of the tradition)
The inner nature of reality through the flow of time (Bergson duration, p.72, Cubism and Culture)

Logical shapes have equivalents in geometric spaces, be they Euclidean or non-Euclidean, or undreamt of geometries possibly never to be found.  This is why art history is spatial, and theory, part and parcel of any proper history, is also spatial.  It is spatial in that it has an intuited space.  An intuitive space.
Cubism was intuitive, as I had said earlier, not extraneously scientific: they had intuitive spaces, intuitive geometries, imperfect ones, thank God, and they applied these intuitive geometrical systems to painting.
Marcel Duchamp’s Portrait of Chess Players, 1911, foresees accurately developments to be made decades later in Game Theory (seeing the geometry of a game of chess, which in Game Theory could easily be graphed).
Profile + three-quarter view
This Sight as seeing the Theory of the Object-Spectacle, is not dissimilar to Bergson’s ‘the faculty of seeing should be made to be one with the act of willing’, saying that in this our vision would transcend its habitual and utilitarian function and, through an effort of intuition, discern the melody of ‘inner’ duration.
The Still Life as Theoretical-Object in the Renaissance..
Adjectival intensity.. start a prose-poem with relatively basic intensities, neutral, drab, to end in explosions of color.  There are many scales in writing, and to form a composite such as the reasonings an individual has during the course of a day, the writer must constitute a framework of different degrees, a wheel from low to high, with varying degrees of intensity.. different angles from which to view each object.. different perspectives, and different intuitive spaces..
AUTOMATISM? is? is it not freedom? is Automatism a sort of determinism?  I need to know this.
I really don’t see the history of painting as having great traditions completely circumscribed in Cubism in 1910, etc.  I don’t see what each individual Cubist did, I don’t see any of it as destroying tradition or even negating it, dismantling it, etc.  They were variations, and the fact that we think of these variations as ‘great jumps’ or ‘great leaps and bounds’, as progress, is a fault of our intellects and is very telling of our minds.
A variation, yes, happens in time, after a time.  But a variation is not a disintegration of the traditional mode or substance, technique, etc., it is a different mixture of the same elements.  Picasso’s Ma Jolie and the first Still life compositions of the Early Renaissance are the same, have the same rhetorical figures (not exactly rhetorical figures, but similar; more like representational mechanisms or pictorial effects, techniques as the mode of rendering the effect and also technique as the mechanism of the mode). – I don’t know what I’m saying but I trust it will someday make sense.
Impressionism, by the way, made Cubism possible, because it was a zone of indeterminacy, a zone of indiscernibility between strict Renaissance perspective and non-Euclidean geometry because it wasn’t perspectival, it had perspectival spaces, but it was really mostly made up of splotches of color, diffracted elements of color, no real forms, just the perfect illusion of form, a landscape with its spatiality made through the use of atmospherical effects.
What we see in the tradition of painting ranging from early Renaissance to Cubism, is a series of adversities, adversities of the various mechanisms integral to visual reproduction of reality or things imagined.  It is not exactly adversity, either.  I like the word Variation, the words Modulation and Modification, Alternation, and Deviation.  Modernism was not the great Deviance that it thought itself to be, it was just another group of formal / technical changes, reformulations, and like any other era, the changes made in the methods of painting were indicative of the global situation the artists found themselves in.  Modernism was not a ‘break with the past’.  There is not such thing, one can not break from the past just as one can not cease to exist for a moment and then re-exist a moment later.  Time would have to be a linear, unbroken continuum for it to have a break, and if it was unbroken, it could not break.  Time as non-linear is always broken so that saying that something ‘breaks from the past’ is ridiculous, since the future also breaks from the present and vice versa.  What I mean is that it sounds ridiculous to say that the Cubists broke from the past.. they didn’t break anything.. they have all the same technical tools, mechanisms, they just rearranged them.  Their innovation is one of design, of technical design, meaning the arrangement of techniques which were pre-existent.  Collage already existed.  All the materials used existed.  There simply is no New in the way that we would like to believe it.  There is only difference, and difference gets its meaning from what comes before and after, therefore Cubism itself is a passage not a break, a quotient, so to speak.  If we look at Impressionism and Surrealism, if we divide the two together, the quotient may very well be Cubism.  There is no Cubism in itself, there is Painting, and I think that Picasso knew this.
Art is not merely imitation, in painting it is the imitation of techniques, or the application of past techniques, but thematic material, even when redone, when taken up again, is not the same, repetition creates a difference, and imitation is never perfect, is always subjectified anyway, given the painter’s own resonance of being.
Aha! herein lies the problem: the Cubists, as modernists, considered themselves as continuing a tradition of serial innovations.  Misunderstanding theorists must have called it ‘a break with the past’ or an Ode to Progress.  Metzinger declared the classical tradition to consist of nothing more than a ‘series of uninterrupted innovations’, adding that the Cubists ‘by innovating only want to continue it’. [p.113, Cubism and Culture]
09/08/02 5:46:52 PM
I want to treat the history of painting not as periods, but treat individual works of art, of painting, as possessing certain stylistic or technical attributes which are or are not indicative of the society lived in by the artist, political situation, the status of art, of the artist in society, etc.  Therefore, I would look at Les Demoiselles d’Avignon not as the origin of Cubism, nor as part of the Spanish tradition or French tradition, but a painting on its own which possesses certain formal or stylistic, technical attributes: looking at the painting in all its materialism, for this has been lost in all the abstract theorism.
8:35:44 PM - What is going on today that I can paint?  The Cubists had a particular socio-political climate and painted accordingly.  What is my climate?  I want to paint a Cubist painting, I’ve wanted to do it for a long time now.
A Cubist still life, portrait, or landscape?  I would like to paint a Cubist still life.  If not a guitar, than what?  A bottle of wine.. aha! that bottle of wine I took a picture of!  I could paint that!  

09/09/02 9:14:27 PM
theory and technique, the concept in painting,
What would the self-aware image look like in 2002?  What would my version of a Renaissance allegorical painting be?  What is the 2002 version of the painting about painting?

Painting today is a nasty business to get into.  It’s tough, there are many locked doors.  It is a business, has entirely to do with money, is a trade.  Painting is not really art in the old sense of the word, although it is still a skill in the even older sense of it.  We put images on our walls, on any wall, really, kitchens, bathrooms, living-rooms, even in our RVs.  With the millions of ad campaigns, of advertisements, the image has become two dimensional in many cases.  It has become text.  We have an extremely large and complex body of cultural signifiers.  Native painting, painting as craft, popular painting.  Design.  Map-making, architectural drawing, visions of Mars.

A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
