The Real Picasso Notes:
11/20/02 8:09:38 AM

Thesis Statement:
Prescriptions and Prohibitions:
Near and Far: Mapping Transgressions and Trespass (the Unforgivable)
	Draft I:
	This essay is part of a larger (prospected) project which will deal with texts in the last several hundred years in search of similarities in Viewing Style, or what I like to call Theoretical Scan-paths.  Beneath the surface of method, technique, and theory, lies human life, of observer and observed alike, and in a sense if my only gift to the science of exegesis was to bring theoretical speculation an inch closer to real material existence as it is experienced by multitudes of living, breathing beings, then I will have accomplished more than I even set out to in the first place.  This essay, in particular, wants to see Pablo Picasso’s 1907 painting Les Demoiselles d’Avignon as it is possible to see it in the twenty-first century, regardless of how it was seen in the past and how it continues to be seen traditionally.  One must remember to think ‘outside the box’ and often to the detriment of their recognition in Academia.  But if one’s work is true to itself, its purpose is not recognition, is not to be some token, but seeks to work out problematic relations between elements of a charted or to-be-charted system or semi-system.  In this case, the system of representation is Art History and the battered and broken remnant is a five-figure painting of a brothel interior which, as piles of notes and texts diversify its possible meanings, loses out in the end in actual historical comprehension due to an excess or saturation of meaning.  This essay, then, comes at a time when Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, though seemingly rich and alive in critical circles, is dying at an unimaginable rate as its materiality disappears in the vaporous mist of textual hermeneutics, where the only real referent objects of new texts are old texts.  This is not universally true, for texts do refer to the actual painting[s], notebooks, objets vues, etc., but at which point does the Demoiselles become a concept for criticism and no longer a work of art created by human work?  Lastly, this essay wants to seek the possible validity of the following propositions: Postmodernism is not necessarily and universally applicable to all areas of scientific or philosophical research.  Historical sciences, for instance, suffer greatly from reflexivity and irony, more particularly the history of painting whose objects are already self-reflexive and self-reflexive attitudes towards self-reflexive works create a labyrinth which loses all grasp of material reality and digresses into abstract speculation, but of a kind closely related to calculus.  How can we jump to the conclusion and see how calculus in the first place can help us restore an objective subjective assessment of art’s real material objects without recourse to the aimless wiles of speculation whose only utility is the advancement of a writer’s career?

	Draft II:
	Theories abound that diagnose without being able to cure, that give the Other back his/her Grace and Integrity yet leave him/her standing alone on an unreachable island (you are not Other, you cannot be Other, only the Other is Other).  There seems to be something sacred about having some Untouchable aspect to your writing.  Writers of all sorts, critics, philosophers, historians, will dig as deep as their bodies and minds allow to find that secret ingredient which is their own and which nobody can touch, whether it be an obscure quotation which chance made possible to find and that no one can ever find again, or a subject with which only the present writer[s] have the expertise and status to write about.  There is nothing inherently wrong with specialization or diligent research on the surface, though this attitude of possession definitely says something about the power of identity and how someone will build a credible cosmogony to hide their avaricious desire to be God, to be their immortal selves wholeheartedly, but in disguise.  Though still in somewhat of a hypothetical form, I have found traces of this secretive, obsessive desire for Deification supplanted by or promoted under the guise of a panoptic vision of real attributes, in 20th century writings on Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon which, when they are not driven wholly by anecdotal mythologizing or merely making unique corrections on past writings in the discourse, are committing the great transgression of appropriating an object (of discourse, surely) to their own gratuitous mission of self-edification through transferred acceptance and praise.

	Draft III:
	It goes without saying that consumerism is partly driven by a yet mysterious power which we call Fetishism and that the objects of the Fetishist’s obsessive passion are not the real target of their neurosis, but perhaps their mother’s imagined penis whose non-existence was discovered in infancy.  It is common knowledge and a generally accepted form of entertainment that academics drop names and create neologisms.  In the field of discourse, however, what can possibly tie what we are doing to something we have already done? something that takes our postmodernism and realizes that prehistoric beings did the same thing and perhaps better, without our self-observed guilt and assiduous denial of non-originality and moribund degenerescence?  

	Draft IV:
	Can one divine an ethical standpoint from an art historical text?  Can a text on Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon make it possible come up with values, rules, with a logic and an ideology which may not be visible on the surface?  How would we have to change the concept of ethics or moral philosophy so that we could find its primitive axiology within an art historical text?
	Historical writing is not something which has traditionally been associated with moral philosophy, though in some cases, and with the way in which I wish to outline the possibility for a slightly altered concept of moral philosophy, it may be quite useful to do so.  When we think of the great statements which have been made on Pablo Picasso’s art, we do not generally think of a value systems.  We may think of epistemological foundations of an art historical text, but traditionally, moral philosophy is of another sphere altogether.  It is my belief that moral philosophy is greatly tied in with artistic creation.  Not only was the concept of the artist in its first form highly reminiscent of concepts of God (God as creator, as originator), but the way in which artists are being written about, especially Modernist painters like Picasso, one would wonder if they are not absolutely being treated as Gods.
	This hypothesis needs briefing.  It needs philosophy, theology, and at some point either a sort of makeshift mathematical physics or analytical geometry.  

physics: the study of matter in motion [change, moral philosophy treats how human beings change and deal with change]

	Draft V:
	This presentation is part of an ongoing project and like all good ongoing projects, it is indeterminate and impossible.  But I wouldn’t be here today if it wasn’t possible to at least share with you a small fragment of the nonsense.  I will be talking about Pablo Picasso’s painting from 1907 titled Les Demoiselles d’Avignon by x, The Philosophical Brothel by y, and which it is said Picasso referred to as mon bordel or my bordello in English.  I wish I could relate to this audience all of what has been written on this painting, but I have been reading and reading and reading for months and there doesn’t seem to be an end.  Somewhere a new essay pops up or a new book and as I am sure many of you have experienced, I feel I was born a hundred years too late and can never catch up to the criticism.  When I have come up with a reasonable thesis or starting-point, it gets published by someone else and I have to start all over again.  So what I have done is chosen to relate to you possibilities for essays on Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon which I am sure will be published by others in the following months or years.
	I have an abominable fear of the Picasso Succession and the supernatural power they have with Picasso’s Intellectual Rights, so I will not be showing the painting.  Instead, I have reproduced it in dollar-store acrylics on a scrap of cardboard hoping that if the Picasso Succession ever finds out about this presentation, I can plead non compis mentis because no one in their right minds would take the time to recreate the world’s greatest masterpiece with such transitory materials.  But in the light of possible nuclear war or end to the planet, I think that my image will get the point across.
	It seems strange to me that so much could be written on a single painting and artist.  People have spent years studying Picasso’s notebooks prior to the painting in a sort of teleological calculus hoping to find the exact sequence of thoughts and actions that occupied Picasso from the years 1900 to 1907.  Careers have been built on assumptions, on speculations, and on outright historical inventions regarding this work.  However, if you can misinterpret a work’s origin or reception and convince the world of your mistakes, then you yourself are a great artist.
	My predictions for the next ten years of studies of this painting are simple and I feel justified in making such outlandish predictions because if no one else publishes the essays, I certainly will.  I believe that one of the first projects involving this work will be to go against the grain of what was written.  As we get closer to the 100th anniversary of the work’s creation, people will question what has been written, not to say that people haven’t yet done that, but that people will not have anything left to say unless they unravel the inconsistencies in what was already said.  A possible take on the matter could be to counteract William Rubin’s educated guess that Les Demoiselles d’Avignon when traced from its earlier forms in sketchbook studies, goes from an allegorical rendering to a more iconic one.  Rubin sees allegorical elements slowly taken away and the shape of the overall image become more square, and therefore closer to the icon, but not in a Peircean way.  People may want to question this as studies of allegory in philosophy, rhetoric, and literature find out that allegory can be more than what we thought it was.  Therefore, perhaps Les Demoiselles d’Avignon IS an allegory, but of a sort of allegory proper to the 20th century, an allegory stripped bare, with a less fluid and more mechanical design.  Other writers will speculate on objects or paintings that Picasso may have seen which contributed more to the formulation of his bordello than El Greco, Cézanne, Gauguin, and Oceanic or Iberian sculpture.  It will become increasingly impossible to use the words ‘primitive art’ or the word Africa without getting involved in huge, detailed and delicate arguments justifying the gross simplification of geographical and historical reality.  As people continue studying Marx’s writings on Political Economy and turn to Mills and Adams for a clearer understanding of Capitalism, they may realize that we are not and perhaps never were practising Capitalism and this may lead us to rethink fin-de-siècle France in terms of what was actually taking place politically and economically.  Then we might finish the guesswork and state that Picasso’s Demoiselles was a great critique of what actually took place and see how his painting informs our present situation of neo-liberalist Statism.  When the post-colonial discourse begins to doubt itself and therefore crack at the seams, people will want to figure out how our serious specific histories did the same thing as those great overarching general histories of entire civilizations, and we might see Les Demoiselles d’Avignon not as a work of its time, but a work of some artist, some guy who loved and hated women and who was also a painter.  Beneath the psychoanalytic writings on Picasso’s multiple drives, lie the drives of the writers treating Picasso.

	Draft VI:
	We have heard constant talk of Separation in Quebec politics and in the casual conversations of domestic interiors.  We are told that Quebec has its own language and culture which is in danger of disappearing if appropriate measures are not taken.  My question is, regardless of the validity of the multitude of arguments for Separation, does the province of Quebec have an art which it can call its own? is there such a thing as Quebecois art and, if so, what does it consist of? what medium or mediums does it manifest itself through? can a certain consistency like that of a tradition be drawn?

	Draft VII:
	Pablo Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon is a work on which more has been written, perhaps, than any painting from modern times.  Journal articles and books on the Demoiselles keep being published every year and are surprisingly wrought with innovative thoughts, new discoveries, and sophisticated conjectures.  In all of this, we have to ask ourselves what made the painting so important to the twentieth – a significance which is bleeding through now into the twenty-first – century.
	When we first glance at the painting, we may or may not be particularly impressed.  To each his or her own affections.  Perhaps the painting really holds some sort of key or then maybe art history in the twentieth century needed an object of discourse to focus its energies on.  We have to remember the time in which it was created.  William Rubin, amongst other later art historians, have charted the early work leading up to the Demoiselles in the form of sketches in notebooks called Carnets or in the form of oil paintings, watercolors, etc.  But at the time of its realization as painting, when it hung around in Picasso’s studio, there was no immediate hailing of it as the greatest work of the twentieth century.  This sort of pedestalling can only ever come in hindsight.  To Picasso’s friends and acquaintances, the painting was a little more than a slight tragedy and a little less than a complete disaster.  That is to say that it was not universally accepted as a self-evident sign of pure genius.  Pablo Picasso, at that time, was well known, but was not the great genius that he would become in subsequent decades.  This would require a lot of work from art critics and historians, collectors and artist friends.
	So what do we immediately see when we look at the painting?  We see five figures scattered about the face of a large almost square canvas.  The title, which was not given by Picasso, hints that it is a brothel.  Les Demoiselles d’Avignon, the Ladies of Avignon, Avignon being a name wrought with undertones.  It is said, by William Rubin nonetheless, that Avignon is a name charged with significance, particularly of streets on which brothels exist, where going to Avignon meant going on one of these streets with a bordello.  The city of Avignon in Rome is laden with a history of profanity (check this out).  There is an Avignon in France, and in Barcelona there is the carré Avina, which may or may not have had a red-light district.  But this is not readable on the surface.  On the surface we see five nudes, all of which have visages which are not in the style congenital to the practises of painting in Europe of that period and traditions.  Again, beneath the surface, tales are told of Oceanic sculpture, of Iberian art, of African art, given the poor title of ‘primitive art’ in a rather telling inscription of a dichotomous relationship between the High art of European traditions coming from the Renaissance and Low art, or not art at all (what Levi-Strauss would call bricolage) of tribal peoples, and forgive me this horrible term, though it was used back then, the art of savages.
	Now we must ask ourselves, when we look at this painting, do we necessarily see borrowings from indigenous art forms or is it possible that the two mask-like faces on the right of the painting come from Picasso’s imagination rather than from his visit to the Ethnographic Museum in Paris (where was it exactly?) or from the Universal Exhibition of 1900 also in Paris whereby an African village was recreated?  There’s nothing which to me breeds more distaste than massively speculative interpretation when there is no factual knowledge available.  Picasso was quick to be asked whether he borrowed from African art, which was given at the time the peculiar name of l’art nègre, or Negro art, and Picasso said he had never heard of it.  Is it ethical in the name of art history to reject the statements of the creator of a work of art in order to prove our own personal opinions?  Who is to tell Picasso what his art signifies?  If the painter in question made several hundred sketches for the painting, worked on its formal layout for several years, are we to suppose that we know more about this painting than he did, he who spent day and night struggling to find an adequate form for his expression?  Critics and historians often say that Picasso was a bit of a trickster when it came to talking about his art, but can we necessarily infer from this supposition that Picasso was a liar and that he illegally stole forms from an art form other than the ones he was rightfully permitted to work with?  Is it not insane to expect an artist not to think outside the box?
	Besides seeing the Demoiselles as the beginning of Cubism and therefore opening the way for all Modern art after it, the painting was also seen as an insult, as appalling, as a degraded and ridiculous work.  What does this say about aesthetes of that period?  Were they not highly discriminatory? and once Picasso, himself a stranger, an outsider, a Spaniard in France and even a stranger within Spain itself (for he had Catalan and Andalusian roots), once his new work was accepted, was he not appropriated by French culture as one of France’s greatest?
	It occurred to me recently that perhaps in the discourse surrounding Picasso’s Demoiselles, a sort of linguistic sensationalism existed.  This, for me, was marked by the constant use of words like whore, savage, cannibal, when clearly there are alternatives.  It is my belief that using the word ‘whore’ instead of prostitute in an essay is due to the fact that ‘whore’ is more charged than prostitute or courtesan, and that in wanting to be true to the initially shocking nature of Picasso’s painting, writers use ideographs to replace and hopefully reinstate the painting’s brutality.  It is my conjecture that in using terms like Negro art, primitive art, the art of the savages, even when one is only relating to an audience the terms that were used back then, in early 20th century France, one is complicit with the violence that these terms suggested in the past, and though one may state that those words or terms were derogatory, discriminatory, etc., one is still using them and they are still charged, and you are committing an offence.  However, not everyone could possibly be expected to desire to write purely inoffensive essays.  At the same time, one should not hide their racism, and I would hope that in the coming years, writings on Picasso’s Demoiselles do not have the ideological underpinning that indigenous art was in fact lower than European art, for it is not even acceptable to say that it was low art back then, for where is this back then if not right now re-enacted in our memories?  It would be better, perhaps, to remember as well that this was the interpretation that some people had in France and in other parts of Europe at the turn of the century.  Complicity is perhaps unavoidable, it is not, however, impossible to expose one’s own discriminations, for we are not perfect any one of us, but those who expose their imperfections, though they may not stand highest in the academic hierarchy, they could very well win the favor of human hearts.

	11/22/02 6:01:44 PM
	What can a collage of musical instruments represent?  Can a painted paper clarinet represent the alluring tone of the instrument?  

	11/23/02 4:15:08 PM
	Note: Gilles Deleuze writes about Alfred Jarry in an essay in Essays Clinical and Critical, titled something like “An Unexpected Precursor to Heidegger: Alfred Jarry”.
	Jarry, Heidegger, Deleuze, Gide, Conrad, Proust, Bergson, Picasso… Bartok, Stravinsky.. remember never to forget mixing in writers, composers, painters, and philosophers of any particular period.  Gide writes at the same time as Picasso paints, as Husserl and Bergson philosophize.  Heidegger = a bunch of German modernist composers…
	Pop art and the Commodity’s Aura through the ages.  From the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, the birth of the factory.. the factory as guild of a design object… 

Les plages [silence in painting]…

Philosophy / Political Economy / Art History (possibly Theology / Ethics)

Fetishism, Christ’s Transfiguration
The Taboo of Magical Thinking (magical thinking IS taboo)
Indigenous Non-Ethnicity (domestic vs. foreign) => the Domestic Stranger
The Frame, painting as Text, modern art as industrial capitalism, consumerism in the 1950s, Transposition, Transference, clinical medicine, psychiatry and art theory..
the Icon, the Index, the Sign, the Emblem, the Symbol.. Indigenous Art, Native art, Primitive art (concept of Primitivism in Europe, 19th century, in North America, 20th century, the world, 21st century => what does Primitivism mean in the 21st century?)
Geometry, Calculus => Calculus as the figure of modern thought and the modern thought on figures

Transfiguration and The Migratory Souls of Planet Earth:

Non-Euclidian Geometry and Modern art (who’s the author?)


Bibliography:
Antliff, Mark, Cubism and Culture
Apollinaire, Guillaume, Exoticism and Ethnography (1912)
Apter, Emily, Feminizing the Fetish: Psychoanalysis and Narrative Obsession in Turn-of-the-Century France
Aristotle, Physics,
Aristotle, Metaphysics,
Bachelard, Gaston, The Poetics of Space
Bahktin, Dialogism (Forms of Time and of the Chronotope in the Novel: Notes towards a Historical Poetics)
Baudelaire, Charles, Le Paradis Artificiel
Benjamin, Walter, Passagenwerk, Paris
Bergson, Henri, Matter and Memory
Bermann, Marshall, All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity
Bois, Yves-Alain,
Burroughs, William S., Cities of the Red Night
Burroughs, William S., The Western Lands
Burroughs, William S., Interzone
Burroughs, William S., The Adding Machine
Chave, Anna 
Clark, Kenneth, The Nude: A Study in Ideal Form
Conrad, Joseph, Heart of Darkness
Conrad, Joseph, An Outpost of Progress
Cottington, David, Politics of the avant-garde (what’s the title?)
Deleuze, Gilles, Capitalism and Schizophrenia
Deleuze, Gilles, What is Philosophy?
Derrida, Jacques, Of Grammatology
Derrida, Jacques, Spurs: Nietzsche’s Styles
Derrida, Jacques, Given Time: I. Counterfeit Money
Foucault, Michel, The Archaeology of Knowledge
Foucault, Michel, Discipline and Punish
Freud, Sigmund, Totem and Taboo
Freud, Sigmund, Fetishism
Gasset, Ortega Y, Idea of Theatre
Gide, André, Travels in the Congo
Gide, André, Les Faux-Monnayeurs
Green, Christopher, ed., Picasso’s Les Demoiselles d’Avignon
Guattari, Felix, Capitalism and Schizophrenia
Guattari, Felix, What is Philosophy?
Heidegger, Martin, Being and Time
Heidegger, Martin, The Question Concerning Technology (Science and Reflection)
James, William, Psychology
Jarry, Alfred, Tout Ubu (Ubu coloniale)
Kierkegaard, Soren, Practise in Christianity
Kierkegaard, Soren, Either/Or
Le Corbusier, Ornament and Crime
Leighten, Patricia, Cubism and Culture
Leighten, Patricia, The White Peril
Levi-Strauss, The Savage Mind
Lomas, David,
Lyotard, Jean-François, The Postmodern Condition
Mallarmé, Un coup de dés, (1897)
Malraux, André, Picasso’s Mask
Marcel, Gabriel, Being and Having
Marx, Karl, Das Kapital
Minor, Vernon Hyde, Art History’s History
Nietzsche, Friedrich, Beyond Good and Evil
Peirce, Charles S., …
Pirandello, Six Characters in Search of an Author
Plato, The Republic, etc.
Praz, Mario, The Romantic Agony,
Rosenblum, Robert
Rubin, William, Buried Allegory in Bread and Fruit dish, Art Bulletin, LXV, December 1983, pp.615-49
Sartre, Jean-Paul, Situation V
Stein, Gertrude, Picasso
Stein, Gertrude, Tender Buttons
Steinberg, Leo, The Philosophical Brothel
Stoichita, Victor I., The self-aware image: an insight into early modern meta-painting
Wysygrod, Edith, Saints and Postmodernism
Zola, Emile, Nana

A.G. (c) 2016. All Rights Reserved.
